The Project Gutenberg eBook of Memoirs and Services of the
Eighty-third Regiment, County of Dublin, from 1793 to 1907, by Edward
William Bray

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Memoirs and Services of the Eighty-third Regiment, County of
       Dublin, from 1793 to 1907
       Including the Campaigns of the Regiment in the West Indies,
       Africa, the Peninsula, Ceylon, Canada, and India

Author: Edward William Bray

Release Date: December 15, 2021 [eBook #66945]

Language: English

Produced by: Brian Coe, Karin Spence and the Online Distributed
             Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This book was
             produced from images made available by the HathiTrust
             Digital Library.)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MEMOIRS AND SERVICES OF THE
EIGHTY-THIRD REGIMENT, COUNTY OF DUBLIN, FROM 1793 TO 1907 ***





                      MEMOIRS AND SERVICES OF THE
                         EIGHTY-THIRD REGIMENT




                         MEMOIRS AND SERVICES

                                OF THE

                         EIGHTY-THIRD REGIMENT

                           COUNTY OF DUBLIN


                           FROM 1793 TO 1907


                               INCLUDING

                     THE CAMPAIGNS OF THE REGIMENT

              IN THE WEST INDIES, AFRICA, THE PENINSULA,

                       CEYLON, CANADA, AND INDIA


                                LONDON

                            HUGH REES, LTD.

                         119, PALL MALL, S.W.

                                 1908

                          ALL RIGHTS RESERVED




                       THE EIGHTY-THIRD REGIMENT

                          “CAPE OF GOOD HOPE”

                “TALAVERA.” “BUSACO.” “FUENTES D’ONOR”

                           “CIUDAD RODRIGO”

                 “BADAJOS.” “SALAMANCA.” “VITTORIA”

                               “NIVELLE”

                  “ORTHES.” “TOULOUSE.” “PENINSULA”

                            “CENTRAL INDIA”




                                PREFACE


This Memoir of the Services of the 83rd (County of Dublin) Regiment,
now 1st Battalion Royal Irish Rifles, was originally arranged and
prepared for publication, from September, 1793, “in which year the
Regiment was raised,” to September, 1863, by Brevet Major Edward
William Bray, who was then serving with the Regiment. The later
history, from 1864 up to present time, has been collected from the
Authentic Records preserved in the Regimental Orderly Room.

    MEERUT,

        _December, 1907_.




                               CONTENTS


   PART I contains the Services of 1st Battalion, from
   1793, the date of its being raised, to 1817, when the 1st and
   2nd Battalions were amalgamated at the Cape of Good Hope.

   PART II contains the History of the 2nd Battalion
   from 1804 to 1814, and the Services of the Regiment during the
   Peninsular War.

   PART III contains the Services of the Regiment in
   Ceylon from 1814 to 1829.

   PART IV contains the Services of the Regiment from 1829
   to 1848, including its Services in Canada.

   PART V contains the Services of the Regiment in India,
   including the Indian Mutiny, from 1849 to 1857.

   PART VI contains the Services of the Regiment from 1858
   to 1863, including the campaign of 1858 in Central India.

   PART VII contains the Services of the Regiment from
   1864 to 1907, including the campaign of 1881 in South Africa.




                                MEMOIRS

                                OF THE

                         EIGHTY-THIRD REGIMENT




                                PART I

               SERVICES OF THE 1ST BATTALION, 1793–1817


[Sidenote: 1793.]

In September, 1793, Major William Fitch obtained a letter of service
to raise a regiment, which, after being numbered, became the 83rd, its
formation bearing date 28th September, 1793, and of which the major was
appointed lieutenant-colonel commandant. The regiment was embodied at
Dublin, and quartered in the old Custom House at Essex Bridge for about
two months, when it was called upon to take a portion of the garrison
duties, in consequence of a great number of troops having been drawn
from that garrison for the purpose of embarking for the West Indies.
The regiment then moved to the royal barracks. The establishment of the
regiment at this period was fixed at 72 sergeants, 26 drummers, 1200
rank and file, and an additional lieutenant added to each company.

[Sidenote: 1794.]

In October, 1794, a second battalion was added to the regiment, and the
establishment of the first battalion was reduced to 52 sergeants, 22
drummers, and 1000 rank and file. The 2nd Battalion soon afterwards was
numbered, and became the 134th Regiment.

On the 7th November, 1794, the regiment embarked at Dublin and sailed
for England. It landed at Pill and marched to Bath, in Somersetshire,
where it was quartered several months. It then marched to Poole, in
Dorsetshire, where it remained about five months, and from thence to
Southampton.

[Sidenote: 1795.]

On the 5th May, 1795, the regiment embarked at Stokes Bay for the West
Indies, and sailed in about ten days afterwards.[1]

On the arrival of the regiment at Martinique, it received orders to
proceed to Jamaica, and, after a few days’ sail, arrived at Port Royal
on the 16th July, 1795.

The regiment was then removed from the chartered ships to men-of-war
and transports, and sailed for Saint Domingo; but the Maroon
insurrection having broken out a few days after the regiment had
sailed, Lord Balcarras, the Governor, despatched a schooner to recall
them; but she could only overtake two ships, which returned with about
half the regiment, which landed at Mondego Bay and was marched into the
interior.

The regiment was actively employed in the suppression of the Maroon
insurrection for about eight months, and sustained a loss of 70 killed
and wounded; amongst the former was the Lieutenant-Colonel Commandant,
William Fitch; and Captains Lee and Brunt slightly wounded--the former
died in four days afterwards.

On the 13th September, 1795, Major-General James Balfour succeeded to
the colonelcy, vice Lieutenant-Colonel Fitch, killed in action.

[Sidenote: 1798.]

The few men that remained of the detachment that went to Saint Domingo
in 1795 returned to Jamaica in 1798.

[Sidenote: 1802.]

The regiment remained on the north side of Jamaica until the beginning
of June, 1802, when it embarked in men-of-war at Savannah le Mar,
Falmouth, and Mondego Bay, for Port Royal, and on its arrival marched
to Spanish Town; shortly afterwards the men were allowed to extend
their services in the 60th and 85th, and a few to the 2nd West India
Regiment.

On the 4th July, 1802, the regiment embarked on board His Majesty’s
ship _Delft_, and landed at Portsmouth on the 22nd August
following, its strength being 1 lieutenant-colonel, 2 majors, 9
captains, 16 subalterns, 29 sergeants, 11 drummers, and 294 rank and
file.

During the service of seven years of the regiment in the West Indies,
it received drafts and volunteers from several regiments, amounting to
410 rank and file, and deducting men who were drafted and volunteered
on its embarkation from England, the regiment appears to have lost by
deaths 870 non-commissioned officers and rank and file, from the period
of its arrival in the West Indies to its return to England in August,
1802.

During this period the officers named in the margin also died.[2]

The regiment on disembarking proceeded to Hilsea Barracks, where it
remained about three weeks, from whence it proceeded to Chelmsford; and
in March, 1803, received the route for Portsmouth, and on its arrival
embarked for Jersey, on board the _Acastra_ frigate and other
vessels; and on its disembarkation was quartered at Grove Hill.

[Sidenote: 1806.]

On the 4th May, 1805, the regiment embarked at St. Heliers. It joined
the expedition at the Cove of Cork, destined against the Cape of
Good Hope, under the command of Lieutenant-General Sir David Baird,
and landed at the Cape on the 6th January, 1806; and was actually
employed in the reduction of that settlement, where its head-quarters
were stationed, and where it remained quartered until October, 1817,
when it was joined by a large detachment of the 2nd Battalion, under
Lieutenant-Colonel Collier, on the reduction of the 2nd Battalion at
Armagh in 1817. The whole of the regiment, now reunited, and forming
but one battalion henceforward, was collected together at Simon’s Bay,
Cape of Good Hope, in September, 1817, and embarked for Ceylon on 1st
October, 1817.[3]




                                PART II

      HISTORY OF THE 2ND BATTALION, 1804–14, AND SERVICES OF THE
                  REGIMENT DURING THE PENINSULAR WAR


The 2nd Battalion, 83rd Regiment, was raised in the year 1804; the
establishment being fixed at 600 rank and file, under the command of
Lieutenant-Colonel Hutchison, who had previously belonged to the 1st
Battalion.

The head-quarters of the 2nd Battalion were first established at
Horsham Barracks, Sussex, where it remained a few months and was then
removed to Chichester, at which place it received a draft of 300 men,
chiefly from the 3rd Royal Lancashire Militia.

[Sidenote: 1805.]

During the stay of the battalion at Chichester, Lieutenant-Colonel
Hutchison was removed to the Staff, and Lieutenant-Colonel Gordon
succeeded to the command of the regiment.

[Sidenote: 1806.]

The battalion removed to Newport, in the Isle of Wight, whence it sent
270 rank and file, with a proportion of officers and non-commissioned
officers (being the entire of the effectives fit for active service),
to join the 1st Battalion at the Cape of Good Hope.

In August the battalion marched to Chipping Norton, in Oxfordshire, and
in November following removed to Battle Barracks, Sussex, where its
establishment was increased to 800 rank and file. After a short stay at
this station, it was ordered to Brabourne Leas and Ashford, in Kent,
and in March, 1807, proceeded to Portsmouth and embarked for Guernsey.

[Sidenote: 1807.]

Having remained a few days there, it re-embarked and sailed for Jersey;
and was quartered at St. Owens, in that island.

In September following it embarked for Ireland; but owing to contrary
winds, the whole battalion was not assembled at Cove till January,
1808, when it marched to Kinsale, County Cork.

[Sidenote: 1808.]

The same month the battalion was marched to Birr, in King’s County,
where its establishment was augmented to 1000 rank and file, and an
additional lieutenant appointed to each company; from this place 14
officers and 214 rank and file were sent to reinforce the 1st Battalion
at the Cape of Good Hope.

In the month of May following the battalion marched to Dublin and
occupied the Palatine Barracks, and in December marched to Fermoy.

[Sidenote: 1809.]

In January, 1809, the battalion marched from Fermoy to Cork, and
embarked at Cove for Corunna; but intelligence having been received of
the battle of Corunna and the evacuation of Spain by the British, a
ship of war was despatched to recall the transports, when the regiment
disembarked and marched back to its old quarters at Fermoy.

In March following the battalion received orders to march to Cove,
for embarkation for Lisbon, and having been previously inspected by
Brigadier-General Rowland Hill, proceeded to Cove, and embarking on
board the transports, sailed to join the British army in Portugal.

On the 6th April, 1809, the battalion, 900 strong, under the command
of Lieutenant-Colonel Gordon, landed at Lisbon, and was immediately
despatched to join the British army, then under the command of Sir John
Cradock, at Coimbra. It was there brigaded with the 9th Regiment (1st
Battalion), and placed under the command of Brigadier-General Alan
Cameron.


                         CAMPAIGN OF THE DOURO

[Sidenote: 1809.]

General Sir Arthur Wellesley, having superseded Sir John Cradock in the
command of the army, advanced to the relief of Oporto, then occupied by
the French. General Cameron’s brigade was placed in General Sherbrook’s
division, and was actively engaged at the passage of the Douro and the
attack on the French in Oporto.

On the 12th May, at the passage of the Douro, Captain Summerfield and
the Light Company of the 83rd were amongst the foremost that crossed in
the boats, and occupied the Seminary, and Captain Summerfield rendered
himself conspicuous by his gallantry in climbing up and endeavouring
to secure the iron gate of the building. The remainder of the regiment
crossed at Villa Nova, and, having fought their way through the streets
of Oporto, came upon the rear of the enemy as, with their artillery,
they were moving out of the town.

At this moment the French were exposed to a flank fire from the troops
which had occupied the Seminary, the 83rd and 9th at the same time
pouring a volley into their rear. The greater part were killed and
wounded, and the remainder dispersing, left their guns in possession of
the victorious British.

In this affair the battalion had 14 men wounded.

The 2nd Battalion, 83rd, was one of the regiments employed in the
pursuit of the French army to the frontiers of Spain; and on the 16th,
a little after dark, after a harassing and stormy march, overtook the
French rear-guard at Salamonde. The 9th and 83rd immediately attacked,
and the French, the greater part of whom were cooking, and quite
unprepared, were speedily driven from the position.

The battalion in this affair had 5 men wounded. The pursuit was
continued on the 18th to Montalagne; but the whole army subsequently
retiring to Abrantes, the 9th and 83rd went into quarters at Tancos, on
the banks of the Tagus, about eight leagues from the former place. Here
sickness prevailed to such an extent in the whole army, and especially
in the 9th regiment, that that corps was obliged to be sent to Lisbon,
and its place in General Cameron’s brigade was taken by the 61st
Regiment, at Oropesa, on the subsequent advance of the army to Talavera.


                    CAMPAIGN AND BATTLE OF TALAVERA

[Sidenote: 1809.]

In all the movements and privations of the British army in this advance
the 83rd bore its full share; and on the 27th and 28th July, when
under Sir Arthur Wellesley, it fought and won the glorious battle of
Talavera. The battalion was most severely engaged, and particularly
distinguished itself in the gallant and impetuous charge on the enemy’s
line, made by General Sherbrook’s division with the bayonet.

In this battle, General Alan Cameron’s brigade, composed of the 61st
and 83rd Regiments, was posted in the left centre of the front line,
with the brigade of Guards on its right, and the German Legion on its
left, and about 100 paces in its front, occupied by its Light Infantry,
was the dry, rocky bed of a mountain torrent. On the 27th, the French
attempted to turn the allies’ left, and to take a height in front
of General Hill’s division. In this they were unsuccessful, but the
following day, at about 2 p.m., they renewed their efforts, and made a
general attack on the whole line.

The battle then recommenced, and raged with redoubled fury. The French
guns played with murderous precision on General Cameron’s brigade, and
the men of the 61st and 83rd Regiments were mowed down by sections.

Under cover of this fire, the French Infantry, in imposing masses,
advanced rapidly and steadily to the attack.

The 83rd Regiment had been previously ordered to lie down to avoid the
tremendous cannonade directed against it; but on the French battalion
nearing the ravine on its front, it rose up, and with the 61st
advancing steadily to meet them, allowed their dark columns to approach
to within thirty paces of their ranks, then, pouring in a well-directed
and destructive volley, it dashed impetuously forward through the
ravine, and, charging vigorously with the bayonet, drove the enemy with
great slaughter headlong before them.

The regiment followed in pursuit, until it received the command to
retire, when, facing about and carrying off its wounded, it steadily
recrossed the ravine, and, amid the warm encomiums of General Cameron
himself, resumed its original position in the line; this (together with
the 61st) it maintained with unflinching resolution till the close of
the day, when the French (who had been temporarily successful on the
right and left of the brigade) were compelled to return, leaving the
victory to the British.

The very severe loss of the 83rd in this hard-fought battle, amounting
to nearly half its number present, fully testifies the honourable
service it performed.

Its commanding officer, Colonel Gordon, while cheering and leading on
his men, fell in the first burst of the glorious charge at their head.

Three lieutenants--Montgomery, Dahman, and Flood--with 2 sergeants and
64 rank and file, were killed with him. Two captains--Summerfield and
Reynolds; 7 lieutenants--Abel, Johnstone, Nicholson, Pine, Boggie,
Baldwin, and Ferris; 4 ensigns--Lord Tulloch, Barry, Carey, and Irwin;
and Adjutant Brahan, with 15 sergeants, 2 drummers, and 265 rank and
file, were wounded; making the total casualties of the battalion 365
rank and file killed and wounded, and amongst the latter many were so
badly injured that on the subsequent abandonment of Talavera by the
Spaniards, the greater part, being unable to move, fell into the hands
of the French.

For the services of the regiment in this arduous battle, Sir William
Gordon, the brother of Colonel Gordon, received the medal which would
have decorated that gallant soldier’s breast, had he happily survived
the action.

Lieutenant Pine, the subaltern of the Grenadier Company of the 83rd,
was promoted to a company in the 66th Regiment for his distinguished
valour in hastening to the assistance of the colours--in carrying
which through this battle, officer after officer had been shot down.
Lieutenant Pine seized one of the colours and bore it gallantly
forward, and did not relinquish it till he was himself severely wounded
and obliged to be relieved of his honourable burden. Many sergeants
also were killed and wounded in protecting the colours through this
fierce battle.

Its casualties, however, had so weakened the 83rd, that it was deemed
unable to keep the field any longer; it was on this account ordered to
Lisbon, and on its departure from the army General Cameron expressed
his approbation of the corps, and his appreciation of its conduct in
the battle of Talavera, in the following brigade order:--


                            “BRIGADE ORDERS

                           “TALAVERA DE LA REAL, _August 29th, 1809_.
   “The death of Lieutenant-Colonel Gordon, who so gloriously fell
   at the head of the 2nd Battalion 83rd Regiment, while charging
   the enemy on the 28th ult., leaves Brigadier-General Cameron the
   painful necessity of regretting the loss of a sincere friend and
   gallant officer, and his regiment that of a brave and worthy
   commander.

   “The conduct of the 83rd Regiment in the arduous contest of
   Talavera merits the Brigadier-General’s warmest thanks, and he
   hopes that Major Napper will justly appreciate the merits of
   those few that are left.

   “The very weak state of the 83rd renders it necessary to send
   them to Lisbon. The Brigadier-General requests them to accept of
   his best acknowledgments for their uniform good conduct whilst
   under his command, and has, at the same time, to assure them
   that he shall be proud to have the 83rd again in his brigade,
   when established in health and numbers.
                      “By order,
                           “(Signed) H. BALNEAVIS, Captain,
                                         “Acting Brigade Major.”


In addition to the above honourable testimonial to its services in
this action, the 83rd has been graciously permitted to have the word
“Talavera” inscribed on its colours and appointments, in commemoration
of its distinguished gallantry in that battle.

The battalion arrived in Lisbon in October, 1809, and remained
there till the beginning of September, 1810, during which period
Lieutenant-Colonel Collins joined from the 1st Battalion and assumed
the command.

In the beginning of September, 1810, the battalion being re-established
in health, and numbering 600 rank and file, marched under the command
of Lieutenant-Colonel Collins, to join Lord Wellington, at that time
retiring to the frontiers of Portugal. It effected its junction with
the army the same month, and was placed in the left brigade of the 3rd
Division, commanded by General Picton, and in the celebrated division
which acquired in the army the distinguished appellation of the
“Fighting Division” the 83rd had the honour of serving throughout the
remainder of the Peninsular campaigns.

With it, therefore, and its heroic commander, Sir Thomas Picton,
the services of the battalion in this memorable war are henceforth
identified, being engaged in every skirmish, battle, and assault which
this renowned division fought and won, and in every glorious deed of
daring and honour it was ever so nobly performing.

On the 26th and 27th of September the battalion was engaged in the
actions on the Sierra de Busaco; but the brunt of the battle falling
to the good fortune of the right brigade, its casualties were few,
amounting only to 1 lieutenant (Lieutenant Colthurst) and 6 rank and
file wounded. For the services of the regiment on this occasion Colonel
Collins received a medal, and his Majesty was pleased to sanction the
word “Busaco” being borne on its colours and appointments.

Shortly after Lieutenant-Colonel Collins was removed to the command
of a brigade in the Portuguese service, and the command of the 83rd
devolved upon Major H. W. Carr.

After the decisive and signal repulse of the French at Busaco, the
British army continued its retrograde movement until it was halted by
its skilful commander in the strongly fortified lines of Torres Vedras,
and the regiment remained in position in these celebrated lines till
the month of March, 1811, when the French, under Marshal Massena,
commenced its retreat.

The British army followed in eager and hot pursuit, and the 3rd
Division hanging closely on the rear, the 83rd was in constant and warm
engagement with the enemy.

It came up with them at Leyria, Pombal, and Condeixa, and in the
skirmishes at those places, and at Fleur-de-Lis, Guarda, and Sabugal,
its casualties amounted to 2 sergeants and 52 men killed and wounded.

In May following, the battalion was actively engaged in the actions
at Fuentes d’Onor, on the 3rd, 4th, and 5th of that month, and was
mentioned in Lord Wellington’s despatch of the battle, as being
distinguished in the defence of the village of Fuentes d’Onor, and
the repulse of the enemy therefrom. Its casualties, however, were
fortunately but few, amounting to 1 lieutenant (Ferris) and 6 rank and
file killed, and 1 lieutenant (Vereker), 1 sergeant, and 22 rank and
file wounded, and his Majesty was pleased to sanction the word “Fuentes
d’Onor” being inscribed on the colours and appointments of the 83rd,
in commemoration of the distinguished conduct of the battalion in that
battle.

The same month the battalion was employed in the first siege of
Badajoz, and had 6 rank and file wounded in the trenches.

The siege being raised, the regiment assisted in the blockade of Ciudad
Rodrigo, and on the 25th September, when Marshal Marmont advanced to
the relief of that fortress, the 83rd, with Colville’s brigade, then
composed of the 5th (2nd Battalion), 77th, 83rd, and 94th Regiments,
greatly distinguished itself. On that occasion immense bodies of French
cavalry, supported by artillery and infantry, attacked the 5th and 77th
Regiments in their position on a hill, covering the road to Guinaldo;
but these two gallant regiments nobly sustained their assault, and
repeatedly repulsed the enemy. Their flank, however, being threatened,
Lord Wellington gave the order to retire, when, being joined by the
remaining regiments of the brigade, the whole, driving back the French
horsemen whenever they approached them, fell back steadily, until they
reached Guinaldo, where they were halted, and joined the day after by
the right brigade, which, stationed at Pastores, had been cut off by
the movement. In this gallant affair the 83rd had 1 sergeant and 5 rank
and file killed, and 3 sergeants and 16 rank and file wounded.


                            CIUDAD RODRIGO

[Sidenote: 1812.]

In the month of January, 1812, the regiment was employed in the siege
and capture of Ciudad Rodrigo; and on the 19th of that month, when that
fortress was taken by storm, the Light Company of the 83rd, under the
Hon. Captain Powys, led the right attack, and escaladed the outwork in
front of the castle. The remainder of the battalion lined the trenches
and covered the advance of the storming parties of the 3rd Division
in their assault on the great breach. The loss of the regiment in
the siege amounted to 4 men killed, and 2 lieutenants (Vereker and
Matthews) and 12 men wounded; and the word “Ciudad Rodrigo” has been
inscribed by the royal authority on its colours and appointments for
its services on this occasion.[4]


                                BADAJOZ

[Sidenote: 1812.]

At Badajoz, in April, the same year, the regiments of the 3rd Division
were again called upon to display the burning, irresistible courage of
British soldiers, and the capture of that fortress by storm on the 6th
April was mainly attributed to the impetuous valour with which they
escaladed and took the castle.

On this, as on former occasions, the 83rd highly distinguished itself,
and its services on the 25th March were most conspicuous.

On the 25th March, fire was first opened on Badajoz, and it was
determined to storm the outwork, La Picurina, after nightfall on
that day. For this purpose, General Kempt, with 500 men from the 3rd
Division, was ordered to carry it by assault. These he divided into
three divisions, the centre of which, composed of 100 men from the
83rd, under the Hon. Captain Powys, was held in reserve. The flank
divisions rushed impetuously to the attack, but the strength of the
work, and the destructive musketry of the French, having rendered their
courageous efforts fruitless, Powys and his reserve were also sent
headlong against it. Running vehemently forward, the men of the 83rd
soon cleared the intervening space, and in spite of a most galling fire
escaladed the work, at a salient angle, and mounted the rampart. Here a
desperate struggle ensued. Powys, first and foremost of his men, fell
dangerously wounded, but Sergeant Hazlust of his regiment, defending
him stoutly with his halberd, kept the French at bay, and held his
ground till the remainder of the men, clambering up thickly and
resolutely, came to his aid, and driving the enemy before them, cleared
the ramparts, and enabled the flank divisions to enter also. For this
gallant service, Captain Powys received the rank of brevet major, but
did not survive to enjoy the fruits of his bravery. With his dying
breath, however, the gallant fellow recommended Sergeant Hazlust to the
notice of his superiors, and that valiant soldier, for his conduct on
this occasion, was almost immediately promoted to be sergeant-major of
the battalion.

On the 6th April, also, the memorable night of the storm of Badajoz,
the 83rd most successfully and nobly availed itself of the glorious
opportunity of distinction afforded it. The distinguished honour of
leading the 3rd Division in the assault on the castle was assigned
to it, and, rapidly and resolutely filing over the narrow bridge of
the little River Rivillas, the regiment rushed impetuously to the
walls, and under a most galling and murderous discharge of shells and
combustibles, planted the ladders against them. Four out of the seven
ladders were broken and destroyed, but officers and men, mounting the
remainder, made the most determined efforts to force themselves in,
repeatedly driven back and thrown down, crushed and bruised, from the
parapets of the ramparts. The 83rd still persevered, and at length
Major Carr, Captain Hext, Lieutenant Broomfield, Adjutant Swinburne,
with others, followed closely by their men, effected an entrance at the
right angle of the work, and established themselves on the rampart. At
about the same time, the remainder of the division scaling the wall
at another angle, the French turned and made in full flight for the
gate. The officers and men of the 83rd rapidly pursued, and closing
the gate, and blocking it with stones, wood, and other materials,
secured the castle from recapture by the French, who, crowding from the
breaches, and pouring volley after volley through it, endeavoured in
vain to retake it. The castle thus being won, the French abandoned the
remaining defences, and surrendered the fortress to the British.

The regiment’s loss in this siege and assault was necessarily
very severe, amounting to one-third of its number engaged. Three
officers--Captains Powys, Fry, and Ensign Hackett--with 1 sergeant,
and 36 rank and file, were killed; and 6 officers--Lieutenants
Broomfield, O’Neill, Bowles, Lane, Vavasour, and Baldwin--and 81
rank and file, wounded. Major Carr received a clasp and the rank of
lieutenant-colonel, and Captain Hext that of brevet major, for their
own and their regiment’s highly distinguished conduct in this assault,
and his Majesty has been pleased to permit the 83rd to bear the word
“Badajoz” on its colours and appointments, in commemoration of the
important and successful service it there rendered.


                         CAMPAIGN OF SALAMANCA

[Sidenote: 1812.]

The fall of Ciudad Rodrigo and Badajoz having opened the way into
Spain, the British army was enabled to commence its march into that
country, and the 2nd Battalion 83rd, serving throughout the glorious
campaign of 1812, had its full share of danger and honour, in the
memorable victory of Salamanca, when the French army, under Marshal
Marmont, was signally defeated on the 22nd July, 1812.

On that glorious day, the 3rd Division, commanded by Major-General
the Hon. Edward Pakenham (General Picton being absent on account of
ill-health) was posted in a wood, behind Aldea Tejada, completely
concealed from the enemy, and securing the main road to Ciudad Rodrigo.
About 2 p.m., the French, endeavouring to turn the British right and
gain the road to Ciudad Rodrigo, extended their left in the direction
of that fortress, thereby weakening their centre, and affording Lord
Wellington the favourable opportunity he had so long desired of
attacking them. He immediately took advantage of it, and assailing
in front, with the 4th, 5th, 6th, and 7th Divisions, ordered the 3rd
Division to attack the French columns, which were moving down on the
Ciudad Rodrigo road, and nobly and gallantly did General Pakenham
launch the battalions of the “Fighting Division” against the enemy;
forming line by regiments, they rushed impetuously forward, and bearing
on with resistless force, carried everything before them.

The 83rd Regiment, with Colville’s brigade, was in the full brunt of
this decisive and successful attack. At one time charging gallantly
forward, it overthrew the enemy whenever he stood to meet it; at
another, halting, and wheeling by divisions, to allow the British
cavalry to pass through, it re-formed, and followed hotly on,
encouraging and cheering the pursuing troopers.

Three thousand prisoners were taken by the division this day, and
special mention of its commander and it was made by Lord Wellington in
his despatch. Colonel Campbell, also, who commanded Colville’s brigade
(in the absence of that officer commanding the 4th Division), received
his lordship’s thanks for its services on the occasion.

The casualties of the battalion in this battle amounted to 13 rank
and file killed, and 1 lieutenant (Lieutenant Gascoyne) and 32 rank
and file wounded; and it had, moreover, the great misfortune to
lose, though not in its own ranks, its gallant lieutenant-colonel
(Lieutenant-Colonel Collins), who, commanding a Portuguese brigade, had
previously, at the sanguinary battle of Albuera, lost a leg, and now,
in this great action again distinguishing himself, received a mortal
wound.

Lieutenant-Colonel Carr had one horse, and Adjutant Swinburne two
horses, shot under them, and in commemoration of the distinguished
services of the battalion of the 83rd in this action, his Majesty
has been graciously pleased to sanction the word “Salamanca” being
inscribed on its colours and appointments.

The battalion was next employed in the investment of the “Retiro,” a
fortified building at Madrid; at which two men of the battalion were
wounded. It subsequently retired with the 3rd Division, when the whole
of the army retreated from before Burgos.


                         CAMPAIGN OF VITTORIA

[Sidenote: 1813.]

The next service which the battalion had the good fortune to be engaged
in was the triumphant battle of Vittoria, on the 21st June, 1813, when
the 83rd bore a prominent part and highly distinguished itself. On that
occasion, Colville’s brigade being in front, the 83rd had the honour of
leading the 3rd Division in its passage across the River Zadara; and
the advance of the brigade against the enemy drew forth the especial
approbation of Lord Wellington, who mentioned it in his despatch in the
following terms:--

“Major-General the Hon. C. Colville’s brigade, of the 3rd Division, was
seriously attacked in its advance by a very superior force, which it
drove in, supported by General Inglis’s brigade of the 7th Division,
under Colonel Grant, of the 82nd; these officers and the troops under
their command distinguished themselves.”

Maxwell, an historian of the great duke’s life, also, in his
description of this memorable victory, thus vividly recounts the
advance of Colville’s brigade:--

“The subsequent advance of the allied columns against the enemy’s right
centre was beautifully executed, as in echelon of regiments it crossed
the hallowed ground on which tradition placed the chivalry of England
when the Black Prince delivered battle to Henry the Bastard, and by
a decisive victory replaced Don Pedro on the throne. As if animated
by some glorious impulse, the battalions advanced not to combat,
but to conquer; Colville’s brigade of the ‘Fighting Third’ led the
attack, and the first enemy’s corps that confronted it was gallantly
defeated. Pressing on with characteristic impetuosity, and without
halting to correct the irregularity a recent and successful struggle
had occasioned, the brigade encountered on the brow of the hill two
lines of French infantry, regularly drawn up, and prepared to receive
the assailants. For a moment the result was regarded with considerable
apprehension, and means were adopted by Lord Wellington for sustaining
the brigade, when (as that event seemed inevitable) it should be
repulsed by the enemy; but valour overcame every disadvantage,
and the perfect formation of the French could not withstand the
dashing onset of the assailants; their rush was irresistible. On
went the daring soldiers, sweeping before them the formidable array
which, circumstanced as they were, appeared calculated to produce
annihilation.”

The 83rd, moreover, had this day the good fortune to obtain particular
commendation from General Colville himself; with the 94th it attacked
and captured a battery of guns, and in an assault on a village, led by
General Colville in person, the men of the 83rd rendered themselves so
conspicuous by their daring valour, that he directed Adjutant Swinburne
(who, with Lieutenants Hingston, Barry, C. O’Neill, and Volunteer
Nugent, were also distinguishing themselves at that particular point)
to take the names of a large number of them, to whom, after the action,
he awarded a guinea apiece.

The casualties of the 83rd in this glorious victory were severe:
3 officers (Major Widrington, Lieutenants Lindsey and Bloxham), 4
sergeants, and 28 rank and file were killed; and 4 officers (Captain
Venables, Lieutenants J. Smith, Baldwin, and Barry), with 6 sergeants
and 68 rank and file, were wounded. Its gallant conduct in the battle
was acknowledged by medals being awarded to its commanding officer,
Colonel Carr, and to Major Hext. Volunteer Nugent also was appointed to
an ensigncy in the battalion, and his Majesty was graciously pleased
to permit the word “Vittoria” being inscribed on the colours and
appointments of the 83rd, in commemoration of the distinguished service
it rendered in that battle.

After this crowning victory, Lord Wellington undertook the sieges of
San Sebastian and Pampeluna, and the 3rd Division was employed in the
investment of the latter place; but being shortly after relieved by the
7th Division, it was formed in right support of the remainder of the
army, which was so disposed as to cover the operations against these
strong and important fortresses.

On the 25th and 26th of July, the French under Marshal Soult having,
after a desperate struggle, forced the Roncesvalles and Maya Passes,
General Picton moved his division up in support, and, forming in order
of battle on the right of the 4th Division, in front of Huarte, and
extending to the hills beyond Olaz, there awaited the further advance
of the French.

In the ensuing hard-fought battles on the 27th and 28th July, the brunt
of the fight fell to the good fortune of the 4th Division, and the 3rd
was but slightly engaged. Its picquets and light infantry, however,
skirmished with the enemy’s tirailleurs, and the division itself
advancing on the right of the victorious 4th, turned the enemy’s left
and completed his signal repulse. In this affair the battalion lost
only 8 men wounded.

The French having been thus driven back, the siege of San Sebastian
was prosecuted with redoubled vigour; and at last, after a second most
sanguinary assault, the city was carried by storm. Pampeluna also
having been reduced, the British general led his victorious troops
from their lofty positions, and, descending from the snow-clad summits
of the Pyrenees, launched them on the fair and fertile provinces of
France.

On the 10th of November, 1813, 90,000 men descended to the fight,
and, rushing simultaneously from various points on the entrenched
and strongly fortified lines of the enemy, commenced the battle of
Nivelle; and here again the “Fighting Third Division” signally availed
itself of the glorious opportunity for distinction afforded it. Led by
General Charles Colville (in the absence of Picton in England), the
division attacked the left centre of the enemy’s position, and carrying
everything before it, won the bridge of Amotz, and seizing the heights
between that structure and the fortified redoubt called Louis XIV,
established itself firmly on them. It then attacked the enemy in flank,
while he was assailed in front by the 4th and 7th Divisions, stormed
the redoubt, hurled the enemy headlong out of it, and, afterwards
crossing the Nivelle, attacked him on the heights on that side of the
river also, and gained triumphant and secure possession of them.

In this battle, as on former occasions, the 83rd was in the heat of the
engagement, and proved itself worthy of the noble division to which it
belonged.

Its casualties amounted to 10 rank and file killed, and 5 officers
(Lieutenants Watson, Barry, and Wyatt, Ensigns Burgess and----[5]), and
28 rank and file wounded; and the royal authority has been received
for the regiment to bear the word “Nivelle” on its colours and
appointments, to commemorate its gallantry in that action.

The next service the regiment was employed in was the passage of the
Gare d’Oleron, when the 3rd Division, under General Picton himself,
attacked the ford above the bridge at Sanvetterre; the regiment, with
the left brigade commanded by Colonel Keane, was in this encounter
warmly engaged, and sustained a loss of 5 rank and file killed, and 12
rank and file wounded, and lost some prisoners from the Light Infantry,
which had crossed the river.

At Orthes, on the 27th February, 1814, the 3rd Division was again in
the very heat and brunt of battle, and highly distinguished itself,
attacking the heights, on which the left and centre of the enemy were
strongly posted. It, after severe fighting, gained possession of them,
and with the simultaneous assaults of the 52nd Regiment on the left,
dislodged the enemy from his position and secured the victory.

The loss of the 83rd in this action was severe, amounting to 1
sergeant, 10 rank and file killed, 9 officers (Lieutenant-Colonel
Carr, Major Blaquiere, Captains Venables and Elliott, Lieutenants
Baldwin, Watson, and Lane, Ensign Nugent and Adjutant Swinburne), with
1 sergeant, 1 drummer, and 28 rank and file wounded; and its conduct
was so meritorious that Colonel Keane, in brigade orders, returned it
and the 87th his thanks for their gallant behaviour, declaring that
in this battle they had added to their already high reputation. On
this occasion Captain Elliott, of the Light Company, was promoted to
be brevet major, and received a medal, and his Majesty was graciously
pleased to permit the word “Orthes” to be inscribed on the colours and
appointments of the 83rd, to commemorate the service it performed in
that battle.

In the month of March following, Picton’s division again encountered
the enemy, and falling upon him at Vic Bigorre, drove him from his
position, and compelled him to continue his retreat.

In this affair the 83rd Regiment was vigorously engaged, and lost 1
sergeant and 6 men killed, and 2 Lieutenants (Hingstone and Lane) and
16 men wounded.


                               TOULOUSE

[Sidenote: 1814.]

On the 10th April, the British army fought and won the crowning battle
of Toulouse, and Picton again led his division into the middle of the
fight. The 83rd Regiment, with the left brigade, was but partially
engaged and suffered a slight loss, and it has received the royal
commission to bear the word “Toulouse” on its colours and appointments,
for its services in that victory.

The war was at this period brought to a conclusion; the illustrious
Emperor of the French, Napoleon Bonaparte, being compelled to abdicate.
His able lieutenant, Marshal Soult, gave in his adhesion to the new
government, and hostilities accordingly ceased.

The 83rd was quartered at La Mao, where Major Blaquiere, having
recovered from his wounds, rejoined and assumed the command. It was
afterwards removed to Blanque Fort Camp, near Bordeaux, where 1
captain, 2 lieutenants, 1 assistant-surgeon, and 15 rank and file
joined from prisoners of war.

The whole army was there reviewed by the Duke of Wellington; and on the
1st of June the battalion embarked from Bordeaux for England.

As a reward for their own and their regiment’s service during this
memorable war, his Majesty was pleased to appoint Lieutenant-Colonel H.
W. Carr a Knight Commander, and Major George Hext a Companion, of the
Most Honourable Military Order of the Bath; and the word “Peninsula,”
inscribed by the royal authority on the colours and appointments of
the 83rd, commemorates the valiant achievements of the 2nd Battalion
throughout the whole of the Peninsular campaigns.




                               PART III

            SERVICES OF THE REGIMENT IN CEYLON FROM 1814–29


[Sidenote: 1814.]

On the 4th July, 1814, the 2nd Battalion embarked on board transports
for Ireland, and on the 24th following disembarked at Monkstown, County
Cork, and marched into the Fort of Kinsale.

On the 10th of September the battalion marched to Clonmel, and on the
30th of October to Kilkenny, when most of the companies were detached
to do duty in the adjacent villages.

On the 9th of November the depôt joined from Maldon in Essex,
consisting of 1 major, 7 lieutenants, 5 ensigns, 10 sergeants, 4
drummers, and 192 rank and file, under Major Sullivan, who assumed the
command of the battalion.

[Sidenote: 1815.]

On the 26th January, 1815, the regiment marched for Dublin, from which
place all the officers belonging to the 1st Battalion then doing duty
with the 2nd were ordered to join it at the Cape of Good Hope.

[Sidenote: 1816.]

In the month of March, 1816, the battalion marched for Armagh, and was
detached in that and the neighbouring counties.

At this place Lieutenant-Colonel Cother, C.B., from the half-pay of the
71st, assumed the command.

[Sidenote: 1817.]

The 2nd Battalion was inspected by Major-General Barnet on the 24th
April, 1817, and disbanded the same day, having previously selected all
the serviceable non-commissioned officers and men (consisting of 8
sergeants, 4 drummers, and 381 rank and file), to be held in readiness
to join the 1st Battalion, supposed to be in the island of Ceylon, for
which station it had been a considerable time under orders.

The major-general expressed his perfect approbation of the battalion
during its stay in Armagh, in a district order, wishing the officers
every success in future.

There were 15 sergeants, 7 drummers, and 164 rank and file (chiefly
wounded men) discharged in consequence of the reduction of the 2nd
Battalion.

The route for the march of the detachment was received on the 22nd
May, 1817, for Fermoy in two divisions, where it arrived on the
11th and 12th of June. The detachment and depôt received a further
route for Cork on the 26th June, from whence the former proceeded in
steamboats to Cove, and embarked on board the transports _Adamant_
and _Eliza_, under the command of Lieutenant-Colonel Cother,
C.B.

The detachment sailed from the Cove on the 7th July, 1817, and arrived
in Simon’s Bay, Cape of Good Hope, on the 22nd September following,
and joined the head-quarters of the regiment, under the command of
Lieutenant-Colonel Brunt in Simon’s Town.

During the services of the 1st Battalion at the Cape of Good Hope,
five companies of the regiment, under the command of Brevet Major
Summerfield, were ordered to proceed to the frontier of Africa, in
consequence of a revolt of a great number of Boers and Hottentots,
joined with the Caffres. This detachment landed at Algoa Bay, and
on its disembarkation proceeded to Graaff Reinet, on the banks of
Sunday’s River, being a march of 350 miles, through a barren country.
This revolt having been amicably settled, the detachment returned to
Algoa Bay in October, 1816, where it remained until September of the
following year.

The head-quarters, etc., embarked, and the regiment sailed from Simon’s
Bay on the 1st October, and arrived at Colombo, island of Ceylon, on
the 16th November and 3rd December, 1817.

[Sidenote: 1817.]

The insurrection in the “Kandyan”[6] provinces of Ceylon having
commenced a few weeks previous to the arrival of the regiment in
that colony, nearly the whole of the battalion, then consisting of 4
field officers, 10 captains, 32 subalterns, 48 sergeants, 22 drummers,
and 969 rank and file, was marched into the interior, and was actively
employed in the suppression of the rebellion. During this service the
regiment suffered much from climate and privation of every description;
the loss in killed and wounded only amounted to 12, but the regiment
sustained a loss of 3 officers,[7] 3 sergeants, 3 drummers, and 112
rank and file by disease, and previous to the effects of this campaign
being eradicated a further loss of 1 officer,[8] 4 sergeants, and 86
rank and file, making a total of 209 deaths within two years after the
landing of the regiment in Ceylon.

[Sidenote: 1819.]

On the 9th July, 1819, the regiment, commanded by Lieutenant-Colonel
Cother, was inspected by General Sir Robert Brownrigg, Bart.,
G.C.B., Governor and Commander-in-Chief of the forces in
Ceylon, by whom the regiment was very highly complimented.

[Sidenote: 1820.]

On the 23rd September, 1819, the following detachment, under the
command of Captain Campbell, joined the regiment from the depôt, viz.,
89 rank and file, and on the 7th January, 1820, a further detachment of
20 rank and file, under the command of Lieutenant Mee, viâ New South
Wales and Calcutta.

On the 25th December, 1818, the establishment of the regiment was
reduced in conformity with the instructions, dated War Office,
23rd November, 1818, to the following numbers, viz., 1 colonel, 1
lieutenant-colonel, 2 majors, 10 captains, 20 subalterns, 5 staff, 35
sergeants, 22 drummers, and 650 rank and file.

[Sidenote: 1821.]

On the 12th March, 1821, the regiment[9] was inspected by Major-General
Sir Edward Barnes, K.C.B., commanding the forces, who issued a
very complimentary order on the occasion.

The 73rd Regiment having received orders in June, 1820, to return to
England, the men of that corps were allowed to transfer their services
to other regiments in Ceylon, when 140 non-commissioned officers and
rank and file volunteered to the 83rd Regiment.

On the 5th September, 1821, the regiment was again inspected by
Major-General Sir Edward Barnes, K.C.B., and the regiment,
still commanded by Lieutenant-Colonel Cother, was again highly
complimented.

[Sidenote: 1822.]

On the 25th February, 1822, the regiment was reduced to the following
numbers, viz., 1 colonel, 1 lieutenant-colonel, 2 majors, 8 captains,
16 subalterns, 5 staff, 29 sergeants, 12 drummers, and 576 rank and
file.

[Sidenote: 1823.]

Agreeably to general orders issued by Major-General James Campbell,
C.B., the head-quarters of the regiment, consisting of 1 field
officer, 4 captains, 3 staff, 12 sergeants, 14 drummers, and 303 rank
and file, embarked on the 22nd January, 1823, under the command of
Major Summerfield, for Trincomalee, and arrived at that station on the
8th of the following month.

On the 20th March, 1823, Lieutenant-General John Hodgson succeeded to
the colonelcy of the regiment vice General James Balfour, deceased.

[Sidenote: 1824.]

The head-quarters, etc., of the regiment embarked at Trincomalee, on
board several vessels, between the 26th March and 31st October, 1824,
and were all landed and collected at Colombo on the 6th November
following.

A few months previous to the regiment leaving Trincomalee, the
Governor, Lieutenant-General Sir Edward Barnes, received orders for its
return to England, but the Burmese War having broken out, the battalion
was detained, and ordered to proceed to Kandy, to relieve the 45th
Regiment, which corps had been a considerable time under orders for
India.

[Sidenote: 1825.]

On the 25th September, 1825, the establishment of the regiment was
increased to 10 companies, consisting of the following numbers: 6
service companies--2 field officers, 6 captains, 12 subalterns, 5
staff, 30 sergeants, 10 drummers, and 516 rank and file; 4 depôt
companies--1 field officer, 4 captains, 8 subalterns, 1 staff, 12
sergeants, 4 drummers, and 224 rank and file.

The regiment was stationed in Kandy from January, 1825, to October,
1825, when it received the route for Colombo, preparatory to
embarkation for England, on board the transports _Amity_ and
_Arab_; the former vessel, with the head-quarters division, under
Lieutenant-Colonel Cother, C.B., sailed on the 4th December,
and the latter, under Brevet Lieutenant-Colonel Kelly, with the
remainder of the regiment, a few days afterwards.

During the services of the regiment in Ceylon (a period of eleven
years) it sustained a loss by deaths of 17 officers and 491
non-commissioned officers and rank and file.

Upon the embarkation of the regiment at Colombo, his Excellency
Lieutenant-General Sir Edward Barnes, K.C.B., was pleased
to issue a most complimentary order to the regiment on its departure
from Ceylon for England. Lieutenant-Colonel Cother, the commanding
officer, was particularly complimented by the lieutenant-general, and
Lieutenant-Colonel Kelly was especially mentioned for his talents and
exertions during the Kandyan rebellion.

[Sidenote: 1829.]

After a passage of about five months, the regiment arrived in England
on the 16th April, and on the 18th May, 1829, landed at Gosport, and
was quartered at Forton Barracks, where it remained till the 27th
August following, from which place it embarked on board the transports
_Hope_, _Amphitrite_, and _William Harris_, for Scotland, and landed at
Leith a few days afterwards and marched to Glasgow.




                                PART IV

                 SERVICES OF THE REGIMENT FROM 1829–48


On the 3rd December, 1829, Major the Hon. Henry Dundas, M.P.,
succeeded to the lieutenant-colonelcy, vice Cother, who retired.

[Sidenote: 1830.]

The regiment was stationed at Glasgow until the 16th August, 1830, when
it embarked on board steam-vessels for Belfast, in Ireland, and on
landing marched to Enniskillen.

During the stay of the regiment at Enniskillen, it furnished
detachments to Omagh, Lifford, Sligo, and Ballyshannon, and on the 1st
November, 1831, proceeded to Castlebar.

[Sidenote: 1832.]

The regiment was quartered at Castlebar until the 23rd October, 1832,
when it received a route for Limerick, at which place the head-quarters
arrived on the 29th of the same month.

During the stay of the regiment at Castlebar, it furnished detachments
to Drunnore, Westport, Foxford, Ballinrobe, and Tuam.

The cholera having made its appearance in the corps,[10] on the 26th
June, 1832, the whole of the men at head-quarters, consisting of 5
companies, and staff, were ordered into camp at Ballinew, about a
mile distant from the town, and remained encamped until the 5th of
September, when instructions were received to reoccupy the barracks.
The regiment lost 10 men by this disease at Castlebar, and 2 officers
fell victims to this malady at Ballinrobe.

The regiment removed to Limerick in 1832, when it furnished detachments
to Newcastle, Bruff, Galbally, Kilfinnan, Tipperary, and Killaloe.

The officers named in the margin[11] died at this station.

On the 11th August, 1833, the regiment received a route for Dublin,
where it arrived on the 19th of that month.

[Sidenote: 1834.]

On the 22nd of February, 1834, the regiment received a letter of
readiness to proceed to Cork for embarkation to Halifax, Nova Scotia,
and on the 5th of April the 1st division embarked on board the
_Innisfaile_ steamer, and landed at Cork on the next day; the
head-quarters division following a few days afterwards.

The separation of the service and depôt companies took place on the 1st
April, and the latter, under Major Trydell, proceeded to Mullingar.

During the stay of the regiment at Dublin, the officer named in the
margin[12] died.

The service companies, consisting of 2 field officers, 6 captains, 18
subalterns, 5 staff, 30 sergeants, 10 drummers, and 479 rank and file,
embarked at Cork, on board the freight ships _Brunswick_ and
_Rickers_, on the 21st April and 15th May, 1834, and landed at
Halifax, Nova Scotia, on the 26th May and 20th June following.

Cholera having made its appearance in the town of Halifax, the three
companies at head-quarters were ordered into camp at Windmill Hill, a
short distance from the barracks, on the 8th September, and remained
encamped until the 1st October. The regiment only lost one man by this
disease.

On the 30th September of this year, Major-General Hastings Frazer, C.B.,
succeeded to the colonelcy of the regiment vice Lieutenant-General
Hodgson, removed to the 4th Foot.

The companies which had been stationed at Cape Breton, Prince Edward’s
Island, etc., since the arrival of the regiment at Halifax, returned to
the head-quarters on the 17th, 18th, and 20th July of this year.

[Sidenote: 1836.]

During this year the regiment remained stationary at Halifax, Nova
Scotia.

[Sidenote: 1837.]

The regiment remained in Nova Scotia until the 29th June, 1837, when,
in consequence of the unsettled state of Lower Canada, orders were
received for its embarkation for Quebec on board her Majesty’s frigate
_Vestal_ and _Champion_ sloop of war. The head-quarters landed on the
12th, and the remaining companies on the 13th July, occupying the
citadel barracks.

During the services of the regiment at Nova Scotia, a period of about
three years, it sustained a loss by deaths of 23 rank and file.

Upon the embarkation of the regiment, Major-General Sir Colin
Campbell, K.C.B., was pleased to issue a complimentary order,
Lieutenant-Colonel Hon. H. Dundas at this time commanding.

On the 3rd August, 1 sergeant and 20 rank and file proceeded to Gross
Isle, and returned to the head-quarters on the 19th October. On the 1st
November, Major Trydell, with two companies, embarked for Three Rivers,
and having remained at that post about ten days, received instructions
to proceed to Montreal.

On the 8th December the head-quarters and remaining four companies
received orders to embark the following day for Montreal, and landed at
that station on the 11th, occupying part of the Quebec Gate barrack.

On the 13th December the regiment formed part of the brigade under
Lieutenant-General Sir J. Colbourne, K.C.B., which proceeded
to attack St. Eustache, and were actively engaged in that day’s
operations.

The following morning the brigade proceeded to Benoit, and returned to
Montreal on the 17th December.

[Sidenote: 1838.]

In January of this year, two companies proceeded on sleighs to the
Upper Provinces, and after remaining some days at St. Thomas, distant
about 600 miles from Montreal, one of them, under the command of
Lieutenant Kelsall, proceeded to Amherstburg.

The brigands having come over from the American shore and taken
possession of Fighting Island, this company, with one of the 32nd,
proceeded on the 25th February to disperse them, which service they
effectually performed; the brigands leaving behind them a small piece
of cannon, with ammunition, muskets, etc. On the 3rd March, this
company was again actively employed against the brigands at Peel
Island, in conjunction with a part of the 32nd Regiment, and finally
rejoined the head-quarters with the other company on the 17th June.

The head-quarters remained at Montreal until the 6th May, when it
proceeded viâ the St. Lawrence to Kingston.

On the 11th November, Lieutenant Johnson, with 44 men of the regiment
and a party of marines, embarked on board her Majesty’s steamboat
_Experiment_, with a view to cut off two American schooners, laden
with some hundreds of brigands, and whom it was reported they intended
to land in the neighbourhood of Prescott. On their arrival, it was
discovered that these marauders had effected a landing about a mile and
a half below the town, and taken possession of a large stone mill and
adjacent houses.

On the morning of the 13th, an attack on the brigands was decided on,
and Lieutenant Johnson and a party, with the marines under Lieutenant
Parker, reinforced by a number of volunteers, proceeded to attack
them. The men advanced under a galling fire from the walls at some
distance from the mill, and speedily expelling them from this position,
compelled them to seek refuge in the mill and houses. Lieutenant
Johnson then attempted to storm one of the houses filled with brigands,
and in the act of doing so was killed, and four rank and file wounded.
Being destitute of artillery to batter the houses, the party was
ordered to retire. In this affair the brigands sustained a loss of
about 40 killed and 28 prisoners.

On the 16th of this month, Colonel Dundas and four companies of the
regiment, with some heavy artillery, landed at Prescott, and at once
took up position about 500 yards from the mill. The guns were brought
to bear on the houses with great effect, and it being now late, and
daylight wearing away, the lieutenant-colonel ordered the regiment to
advance, when a smart fire was opened by the brigands from one of the
houses, and as quickly replied to. The buildings on the left of the
mill being by this time gained, were set fire to, and the enemy, seeing
no prospect of escape, threw out a “white flag,” and about 130 of them
surrendered unconditionally.

Their killed in this affair amounted to about 30. The only loss
sustained by the regiment on this occasion was one private killed. The
four companies returned to Kingston the day following.

[Sidenote: 1839.]

During this year the regiment remained stationary at Kingston.

[Sidenote: 1840.]

On the 19th May, 1840, the officer named in the margin[13] died at this
station, and he was succeeded first by Lieutenant B. H. Browne, and on
his promotion Ensign William Nott was appointed adjutant. Ensign Nott
was promoted from the ranks, and performed the duties of adjutant most
efficiently for eleven years, when he became captain by seniority in
1851, at Kurrachee.

The regiment remained at Kingston, N. S., until the 20th and 21st May,
1840, when it embarked in steamboats for London and St. Thomas, N. S.,
and marched into quarters at these stations on the 29th and 30th of the
same month.

[Sidenote: 1841.]

On the 14th May, 1841, Lieutenant Wynniatt was accidentally drowned
while endeavouring to ford the River Thomas on horseback.

On the 4th October, 1841, Captain Colquhoun died at London (England)
while on leave of absence.

[Sidenote: 1842.]

The 1st division of the regiment, under the command of Brevet Major
Swinburne, marched _en route_ to Toronto on the 7th July,
1842; and the 2nd division or head-quarters, under the command of
Lieutenant-Colonel Trydell, on the following day. The former arrived at
Toronto on the 14th, and the latter on the 15th July, 1842.

On the 2nd August, 1842, Brevet Lieutenant-Colonel B. Trydell succeeded
to the lieutenant-colonelcy of the regiment, vice the Hon. H. Dundas,
placed on half-pay.

[Sidenote: 1843.]

The 1st division of the regiment proceeded on the 22nd May, 1843, to
Three Rivers, under the command of Major Swinburne. The 2nd division
and head-quarters proceeded to Quebec on the 23rd, and arrived there
on the 27th May. No. 4 company joined head-quarters at Quebec on the
30th May, leaving No. 1 and the Light Company at Three Rivers. Light
Company and No. 1 joined the head-quarters at Quebec on the 11th June,
1843, from Three Rivers.[14]

The regiment embarked for England at Quebec, Canada, on the 16th
June, 1843. The 1st division and head-quarters, under the command
of Lieutenant-Colonel Trydell, on board the _Countess_, London
freight ship, consisting of 3 captains, 5 subalterns, 3 staff, 28
sergeants, 8 drummers, and 502 rank and file, 54 women, and 110
children; and the 2nd division, under the command of Major Swinburne,
on board the _Jamaica_, freight ship, consisting of 1 captain, 4
subalterns, 1 staff, 10 sergeants, 2 drummers, 184 rank and file, 16
women, and 20 children, sailed together on the 17th June, 1843, and
both ships anchored at Spithead on the 10th July, 1843.

The 2nd division, under the command of Major Swinburne, landed at
Gosport on the 11th; and the 1st division and head-quarters, under the
command of Lieutenant-Colonel Trydell, on the 12th July, 1843.

The regiment was quartered in Forton Barracks, Gosport, until the 17th
July, when the 1st division proceeded by railroad, through London,
to Weedon, and the head-quarters division on the following day, at
which they occupied barracks until the 4th August, 1843, when the
head-quarters with two companies proceeded to Northampton, and the
remainder of the regiment was distributed in detachments at Birmingham,
Wolverhampton, Burslem, Coventry, Hanley, and Newcastle-under-Lyme.

On the 17th October, 1843, the regiment received the new percussion
muskets.

[Sidenote: 1844.]

In April, 1844, the regiment was again collected at Weedon, where
it remained till October, 1844, when the head-quarters and three
companies proceeded to Leeds, and the remainder furnished detachments
to York, Bradford, Sheffield, Keighley, Huddersfield, Halifax, and
Scarborough Castle.

[Sidenote: 1845.]

In June, 1845, the regiment was assembled at Manchester, where it
remained till 22nd July, when it proceeded by rail to Liverpool,
and embarked for Dublin, where it arrived the following morning,
and proceeded _en route_ to Limerick, Cahir, and Tipperary.
The head-quarters of the regiment were established at Limerick, and
furnished detachments also to Kilrush, the forts on the Shannon,
Rathkeale, Newcastle, Castleconnell, Croom, Ennis, and Clare Castle.

[Sidenote: 1846.]

In September, 1846, the regiment proceeded by divisions to Dublin, and
was assembled there in October. It occupied Richmond Barracks, and
subsequently detached companies to Aldboro’ House and Island Bridge
Barracks.

During the stay of the regiment at Dublin, Captain T. J. St. Aubyn died
while on leave of absence in Surrey.

[Sidenote: 1847.]

In May, 1847, the head-quarters proceeded to Kilkenny, and during
its stay there furnished detachments to Carlow, Castlecomer,
Carrick-on-Suir, Bagenalstown, Thomas Town, Wexford, Enniscarthy, New
Ross, Callan, and Graignenemagh.

[Sidenote: 1848.]

Lieutenant T. Lane died at Castlecomer on 26th June, 1848.

On the 1st September, 1848, Major-General Sir Frederick Stovin, K.C.B.
and K.C.M.G., succeeded General Frazer in the colonelcy of the regiment.

In September, 1848, the regiment was removed to Fermoy, whence it
furnished detachments to Fethard, Lismore, and Clogheen.




                                PART V

              SERVICES OF THE REGIMENT IN INDIA, 1849–57


On the 1st December, 1848, the regiment was ordered to be augmented
to the establishment as per margin,[15] and received instructions to
prepare for service in the East Indies, and on the 9th January, 1849,
two companies, with head-quarters, proceeded to Cork, and embarked
on the 11th, under the command of Lieutenant-Colonel Trydell, in the
freight ship _Bombay_, for Bombay, and sailed for its destination
on the 17th of the same month.

[Sidenote: 1849.]

The remainder of the regiment followed in the succeeding months of
February and March, as follows, viz.--

In the _China_, under Major Townsend.

In the _Mermaid_, under Brevet Major Ainslie.

In the _Marion_, under Lieutenant-Colonel Law.

In the _Ursula_, under Captain Lloyd.

In the _Zion’s Hope_, under Major Swinburne.

On the 8th May, 1849, the head-quarters arrived in Bombay, and on the
10th, disembarked and proceeded to Poona, and arrived at that station
on the 18th of the same month. The whole of the regiment, however, was
not assembled at Poona till the 14th July, 1849, where it remained till
November, 1850.

During the stay of the regiment at Poona, it lost by disease two
officers (Captain the Hon. W. Gage and Surgeon Ledingham), 5
sergeants, 1 drummer, and 69 rank and file.

[Sidenote: 1850.]

In November, 1850, the regiment marched in four divisions on the 2nd,
3rd, 4th, and 11th of the month for Panwell and Bombay, and embarked in
steamers for Kurrachee, where the head-quarters arrived and disembarked
on the 14th of the same month, but the last division did not join the
regiment till the 1st December following.

[Sidenote: 1851.]

In January, 1851, Lieutenant-Colonel Trydell was appointed to the
command of the Poona brigade, and Lieutenant-Colonel W. H. Law assumed
command of the regiment.

From November, 1850, to 31st December, 1852, the regiment was
stationed at Kurrachee, and lost through disease during that period 5
officers--viz., Major Townsend, Lieutenant and Adjutant W. Hall,[16]
Ensign Graham, Quartermaster Colburn (at Poona when on leave), and
Assistant-Surgeon Boyce--and 6 sergeants, 3 drummers, and 135 rank and
file, chiefly cases of cholera, fever, and dysentery.

On two occasions--viz., in May and June, 1851, and again in September
and October, 1852--the regiment was visited with cholera, fever, and
dysentery, and suffered greatly, and on the last occasion it was
considered necessary to remove the regiment from the barracks and
encamp the men on Ghizree Heights, near the sea.[17]

[Sidenote: 1852.]

It, however, soon recovered from these fell diseases, and numbered
upwards of 950 efficient soldiers, men strong and stalwart in form,
perfect in discipline, and influenced in no ordinary degree by an
ardent _esprit de corps_, the prestige of the honourable name and
high reputation won by the 83rd wherever it served.

[Sidenote: 1853.]

On the 8th February, the right wing of the regiment (448 strength),
under the command of Brevet Lieutenant-Colonel Swinburne, proceeded in
river steamers by the Indus River to Hyderabad, there to be stationed.

On the 15th March, 1853, the establishment of the regiment was altered
by Horse Guards’ letter, dated 24th March, 1853, to 12 captains, 20
lieutenants, 4 ensigns, and 1 adjutant.

Brevet Lieutenant-Colonel Joseph Swinburne, after a long and
distinguished service of forty-four years in the 83rd Regiment,
retired from the service on the full pay of his rank of major. He
served throughout the whole of the Peninsular campaign (the greater
part of the time as adjutant), and received a medal and ten clasps for
Talavera, Busaco, Fuentes d’Onor, Ciudad Rodrigo, Badajoz, Salamanca,
Vittoria, Nivelle, Orthes, Toulouse. He was engaged with the regiment
in the Kandyan rebellion and in Canada, and, embarking with the
regiment for India, left it on the 22nd May, 1853, with the esteem and
veneration of every individual in it.

He was succeeded in the majority by Captain Henry Lloyd.

The head-quarters, consisting of 5 subalterns, 4 staff, 19 sergeants,
6 drummers, and 353 rank and file, embarked at Kurrachee on board the
Hon. E.I.C. steam frigate _Semiramis_, for Gogo, _en route_
for Deesa; landed at Gogo on the 22nd December, where they were halted
and encamped awaiting further orders.

On the departure of head-quarters from Scinde, Major-General Sir Henry
Somerset, K.C.B., issued a very complimentary order to the regiment.
Lieutenant-Colonel W. H. Law was then commanding, and Lieutenant E. H.
M. Mainwaring was adjutant.

[Sidenote: 1854.]

On the 9th January, 1854, Major Henry Lloyd joined from England, and
assumed command of the head-quarters division at Gogo, Guzerat.

On the 22nd January, 1854, the head-quarters division, under Major
Lloyd, marched from Gogo, and arrived at Deesa on the 13th February.

On the 23rd April, Major Henry Lloyd made over command of the
head-quarters division to Captain E. W. Bray, the senior officer, and
left Deesa for Kurrachee, there to assume command of the right wing.

On the 6th May, Major Henry Lloyd died at Cambay of Asiatic cholera,
while proceeding by that route to Kurrachee, to assume command of the
companies there stationed.

On the 14th October, the half-yearly inspection of the head-quarters
division of the regiment took place at Camp Deesa, under
Brigadier-General Forster Stalker, C.B., commanding northern
division of the army. Captain E. W. Bray at that time commanded, and
Lieutenant E. H. M. Mainwaring was adjutant.

[Sidenote: 1855.]

On the 4th January, Colonel W. H. Law joined from Kurrachee, and
assumed command of the head-quarters division of the regiment stationed
at Deesa.

On the 29th March, the half-yearly inspection of the head-quarters
division of the regiment took place at Camp Deesa, under Major-General
F. Stalker, C.B., commanding northern division of the army.

On the 2nd April, the right wing, consisting of seven companies, under
the command of Captain C. W. Austen, arrived at Bombay, from Kurrachee,
and was quartered in the barracks of Colaba.

During its service in Scinde the regiment lost through disease, 5
officers, 6 sergeants, 4 drummers, 142 rank and file.

On the 9th March, a draft, consisting of 1 sergeant, 2 corporals,
and 35 privates, under the command of Ensign G. Mylne, joined the
head-quarters of the regiment at Deesa from England.

On the 29th October, the half-yearly inspection of the head-quarters
division of the regiment took place under Major-General F. Stalker,
C.B., commanding northern division of the army.

On the morning of the 22nd December, the right wing of the regiment,
consisting of seven companies (strength--1 field officer, 2 captains,
4 subalterns, 20 sergeants, 8 drummers, 477 rank and file), under
the command of Major Kelsall, embarked at Bombay on board of the
_Ajdaha_ for Domus, where it disembarked on the following day,
and on the 25th commenced its march upon Deesa, viâ Surat, Baroda, and
Ahmedabad, and finally reached its destination on the 25th January,
1856, after having been separated from head-quarters for a period of
three years.

[Sidenote: 1856.]

On the 21st January, an order was received to hold a wing of the
regiment in readiness to proceed on field service.

On the 30th of the same month, 42 recruits, under the command of
Lieutenant Cooper, joined the regiment from England.

On the 27th March, the half-yearly inspection of the regiment took
place, under Brigadier N. Wilson, K.H., commanding Deesa Field
Brigade.

On 16th May, Colonel W. H. Law retired on full pay from the service,
with the rank of major-general; he served in the Peninsular War, and
was present at the battles of Nivelle and Nive, for which he received
the war medal and two clasps. Colonel Trydell being brigadier at Poona,
the command of the regiment devolved on Lieutenant-Colonel Kelsall, the
second lieutenant-colonel.

On the 1st August, Lieutenant and Adjutant E. H. M. Mainwaring died at
Poona.

On the 27th October the half-yearly inspection of the regiment took
place, under Brigadier N. Wilson, K.H., commanding Deesa Field
Brigade.

[Sidenote: 1857.]

On the 23rd March a detachment, in strength 3 sergeants, 4 drummers, 9
rank and file, 6 women, and 15 children, proceeded, under the command
of Lieutenant Dickenson (and in medical charge of Assistant-Surgeon
Miles), to Mount Aboo.

During the month of May, 1857, the regiment was held in readiness for
field service, in consequence of the mutinies of the Bengal native
army; and on the 26th of that month the left wing, composed of Nos. 5,
6, 7, and the Light Company (strength--1 field officer, 2 captains,
6 subalterns, 2 staff, 18 sergeants, 6 drummers, 250 rank and file),
under the command of Major Steele, proceeded on active service and
marched on Nusseerabad, where it arrived on the 12th June, having
performed a march of 237 miles in seventeen days during the hottest
time of the year without a single casualty.

On the 13th June No. 7 Company was detached from the left wing to
garrison the fort and arsenal of Ajmere.

The left wing was reinforced by Nos. 1, 2, 3 Companies (strength--1
captain, 2 subalterns, 7 sergeants, 3 drummers, 200 rank and file),
which left the head-quarters at Deesa on the 17th June, and arrived at
Nusseerabad on the 10th July.

On the 9th July two companies, under the command of Captain Read, were
detached from Nusseerabad to Neemuch, 143 miles distant, where they
arrived on the 18th of the same month.

On the 14th July the Grenadier Company, under the command of Captain
Jones, left head-quarters for Ahmedabad, the native troops in garrison
there having displayed symptoms of disaffection.

On the 10th August the left wing at Nusseerabad disarmed a detachment
of the 12th Regiment N. I., which had exhibited evident symptoms of
a mutinous spirit; and on the night of the 12th of the same month,
the detachment at Neemuch, under Captain S. Read, was called out to
suppress a mutiny of a squadron of the 2nd Bombay Light Cavalry; the
night was exceedingly dark, but the detachment succeeded in making
several prisoners, and sustained a loss of one man killed (Private
Chambers) and two wounded.

On the 21st August the detachment of the 50 invalids at Mount Aboo
was attacked by about 150 mutineers of the Joudpoor Legion, who
were repulsed with some loss in killed and wounded, without the
detachment having sustained any loss. On receipt of this intelligence
at Nusseerabad, a wing of the Joudpoor Legion, there stationed, was
disarmed by the 83rd Regiment.

On the 30th August a detachment of 3 officers and 119 rank and file,
under the command of Brevet Major Heatly, proceeded from Nusseerabad
for the purpose of preserving the peace of the city of Ajmere during a
Mohammedan festival. This detachment was joined on the 1st September by
a detail of 1 sergeant and 30 rank and file from the company stationed
in the fort of Ajmere. The detachment then proceeded on active service
to Beawar, where it was reinforced by 1 captain, 2 sergeants, 1
drummer, and 50 rank and file from Nusseerabad; the detachment then,
with four guns of the Bombay Horse Artillery and some native troops,
proceeded by the mountain pass of Burr, on a reconnaissance to Awah,
which they found to be a strongly entrenched village, garrisoned
by about 3000 armed men, well provided with artillery. On the 18th
September an unsuccessful attack was made on the village, in which
three men, 83rd Regiment, were wounded, two of our four guns were
disabled, and one artilleryman was killed and two wounded, and some
casualties occurred amongst our native troops; the whole force then
returned to Ajmere, where it arrived on the 28th September.

On the night of the 18th September the detachment stationed at Neemuch,
under the command of Captain Read, together with two guns supported
by a detail of native troops, marched from Neemuch to take the walled
village of Nimbhera, sixteen miles distant, which was occupied by
mutineers and rebels with three guns; during the following day the
force took up a position near the village, and opened fire with the
view of effecting a breach; the fire was kept up till dark, when
further operations were suspended till next day. During the night of
the 19th the enemy, leaving their guns, ammunition, etc., hastily
evacuated the village, which was taken possession of by the force on
the morning of the 20th.

During the action of the 19th Assistant-Surgeon Miles was wounded in
the leg, and Lance-Corporal Thomas Young was killed.

On this occasion each man of the detachment received 8 rupees (16s.)
prize-money. On the night of the 20th September the force returned to
Neemuch, leaving 1 sergeant, 1 drummer, and 30 rank and file, under
Ensign Chamley, to occupy the village, which detachment rejoined the
following day.[18]

A considerable body of the Mundisore insurgents having occupied the
fort and village of Jeerun, about ten miles from Neemuch, on the
morning of the 23rd October a detachment of 50 of the 83rd, commanded
by Captain Read, together with a company of the 12th Bombay N. I., some
native cavalry, and two guns, moved against them from Neemuch. A very
determined resistance was offered by the enemy, and Captain Read was
killed by one of their first musket shots, while leading on his small
detachment. Captain Tucker commanding the cavalry was killed, and the
officer commanding the native infantry detachment was severely wounded
about the same time. The enemy advancing in great force, the infantry
retired to a fresh position, and the enemy having suffered severely
from their fire, withdrew into the fort of Jeerun, which was occupied
and blown up on the following morning, the enemy having evacuated it in
the night. In addition to the death of Captain Read, two privates were
wounded in this affair.

On the 9th November the small fortified position at Neemuch, which was
garrisoned by a detachment of the 83rd Regiment, under Ensign Chamley,
and some native troops, the whole under command of Major Simpson, 2nd
Light Cavalry, was attacked by a very large insurgent force, which
invested the fortification for fifteen days; their several attempts at
assault by escalade were repulsed with heavy loss, and on the 23rd of
the month they broke up and retired on the advance of a force from Mhow
to the relief of the garrison, which had sustained a loss of about 20
in wounded during the siege.

The head-quarters of the regiment, which had remained at Deesa up to
this time, received orders to advance into Rajpootana, and marched
for Mount Aboo on the 26th October, under command of Colonel Trydell;
thence it proceeded to Nusseerabad, where it arrived on the 28th
November.

The detachment at Neemuch was now relieved by two companies commanded
by Major Austen.




                                PART VI

                   SERVICES OF THE REGIMENT, 1858–63


[Sidenote: 1858.]

An expedition was organized for the reduction of the fortress of Awah,
and two companies of the regiment having joined it, about 1000 men of
all arms, with some siege guns, arrived before Awah on the 19th January.

Batteries were constructed, and their fire was warmly replied to by the
enemy; an assault was arranged for the morning of the 24th January,
but, favoured by a night of intense darkness and a heavy thunderstorm,
the enemy evacuated the fortress during the night of the 23rd, about 50
of their number being killed, or taken by the picquets. Thirteen guns
were taken in the place. The defences and fortified palace were mined
and destroyed. The detachment had two men wounded.

Colonel Trydell and Lieutenant-Colonel Kelsall having proceeded to
England, the command of the regiment devolved on Major Steele on the
24th February, 1858.

On the 8th March the regiment was joined by a draft of 152 men from
England commanded by Captain Wright.


SIEGE AND CAPTURE OF KOTAH

The strongly fortified city of Kotah on the River Chumbul had been
for many months held by a formidable insurgent force. Major-General
Roberts, of the Honourable East India Company’s Army, commanding in
Rajpootana, now moved against it from Nusseerabad, with two strong
brigades; the 1st marching on the 10th March. With this brigade were
three companies of the regiment, under the command of Captain (Brevet
Lieutenant-Colonel) Heatly.

The 2nd Brigade, commanded by Colonel Parke, of the 72nd Highlanders,
to which the head-quarters of the regiment (strength 11 officers and
300 men) was attached, moved from Nusseerabad on the 11th March. The
whole force comprised H.M.’s 8th Hussars, a company of Royal Engineers,
the 72nd, 83rd, and 95th Regiments, a numerous force of native
cavalry and infantry, a siege-train of 18 heavy guns and mortars,
also 3 troops and batteries of horse and foot artillery of the Hon.
Company’s service--about 4500 of all arms. The force encamped on the
22nd March before the city, on the opposite bank of the River Chumbul;
the regiment furnished the usual working parties, trench and battery
guards, outlying picquets, etc., until the 25th of the month, when,
the capture by the enemy of the Rajah’s palace, which was held by
our troops, being imminent, 200 men of the detachment of H.M.’s 83rd
Regiment, with the 1st Brigade, were directed to cross the river, with
other troops, for its protection; this detachment sustained a loss of
3 men killed and 5 non-commissioned officers and men wounded in the
following three days, in which some vigorous assaults by the enemy were
repulsed with heavy loss in killed and wounded. On the 30th the city
was taken, having been entered by three columns of assault, the centre
column being led by the head-quarters division of the 83rd Regiment,
under Lieutenant-Colonel Steele; the detachment of the 83rd with the
1st Brigade, commanded by Brevet Lieutenant-Colonel Heatly, was in
reserve, and entered the city later in the day. The regiment sustained
a loss of 1 man killed and 6 wounded. The enemy abandoned their
defences and retired towards Gwalior, having sustained a considerable
loss in the siege and assault; about 80 guns were taken in the city,
with large magazines of ammunition and supplies.

Having remained encamped before Kotah till the 18th April, the
besieging force was broken up, and the regiment marched on return to
Nusseerabad, arriving there on the 29th. The usual relief of detachment
of one company in the fort of Ajmere took place on the 3rd May.

Enfield rifles were issued to the regiment at this time; the
waist-belt, with small pouch in front, had been supplied to the
regiment in supersession of the old cross-belts about one year
previously.

Lieutenant-Colonel Kelsall having retired on full pay, Major Steele
succeeded to the rank of Lieutenant-Colonel of the regiment on the 13th
April, 1858.

On the 23rd May, the two companies which had been on detachment at
Neemuch, under command of Major Austen, since December, rejoined the
head-quarters of the regiment.

About the middle of June, the decisive successes of the division of
the army commanded by Major-General H. Rose having caused the rebel
army to evacuate the Gwalior territory, a very numerous hostile force,
estimated at 10,000 men, crossed the River Chumbul, and entered the
territory of the Rajah of Jeypoor, who had always displayed friendly
feelings towards the British Government. A considerable force, about
2500 strong, of which the head-quarters and 600 of the 83rd composed
a part, was placed under orders for field service in consequence,
and marched from Nusseerabad on the 28th June, under command of
Major-General Roberts. On the 3rd July this force arrived within
one march of the city of Jeypoor, which was in imminent danger from
the advance of the rebel army. On the approach of General Roberts’s
division, the enemy, changing their direction, moved southwards and
attacked the capital of the Rajah of Tonk, which was occupied and
partially plundered by them. The Rajah retired to his fortified palace,
and offered all the resistance in his power to their assaults. A
portion of his troops, however, proved faithless, and joined the enemy,
giving up to them the guns which had been in their charge.

General Roberts’s advance by forced marches caused the rebels to retire
from before Tonk, and a considerable portion of the British force was
detached in pursuit in a south-easterly direction; about 900 men,
including the 83rd Regiment, remaining under the personal command
of the general. The weather was at this time extremely hot, and the
exposure consequent on the urgent duties in which the force was engaged
proved fatal to many of the soldiers composing it. Six men of the 83rd
died from sunstroke between the 7th and 10th July.

The enemy, pressed upon by the detached column, changed their line of
march towards the west, and General Roberts, still moving by forced
marches, succeeded in coming up with them late on the evening of the
8th August. They were seen formed in great force near the village of
Sanganeer--the number was estimated at 8000 men, two-thirds of whom
were cavalry. The regiment at once advanced to the attack under a heavy
fire from the artillery of the enemy, which, however, being directed
too high, did no execution, while many of the rebels were killed and
wounded by the rifles of the 83rd. Darkness, however, coming on,
enabled the enemy to retire and withdraw the whole of their guns. The
force had marched this day thirty miles, and bivouacked on the spot,
having far outmarched their tents and baggage. Waiting one day to allow
the column which had been detached from Tonk to join him, General
Roberts’s force moved on the 10th August in pursuit of the enemy. This
brigade had been reinforced by the junction of one troop of Bombay
Horse Artillery, a squadron of the 8th Royal Irish Hussars, a squadron
of Native Light Cavalry, 4 companies 72nd Highlanders, and a Sepoy
Regiment of the Bombay army, as well as by a strong body of Belooch
horsemen.

A very persevering pursuit now took place on the track of the rebel
army, the outpost picquets of which were surprised and cut to pieces on
more than one occasion. At about 7 a.m. on the 14th August, the enemy
were seen moving in heavy masses, of horse and foot, on the further
bank of the Bunnass River, their line of movement being covered by
their artillery, which was posted in a battery on the crest of a rising
ground close to the village of Kottaria; only waiting to form and load,
the force at once advanced towards the river, the 83rd Regiment leading
in a double column of sub-divisions from its centre. The enemy’s guns
opened with round and grape, and were instantly vigorously engaged by
the British Horse Artillery, and the fire on both sides was for a time
extremely heavy. The 83rd, forming line, crossed the river, meeting but
little resistance, and the enemy, abandoning their guns, retired with
precipitation. The cavalry charged amongst the retreating artillerymen
and infantry, and the pursuit was continued for some miles, very great
numbers of the rebels falling under their sabres, while the fugitives
seeking shelter in the groves and copse-wood were destroyed by our
infantry. In the evening the force returned and encamped near Kottaria,
having sustained only the small loss of 22 killed and wounded, while
fully 1000 of the rebels were left dead on the field, and 4 guns, with
their ammunition, and many elephants and camels laden with stores,
were captured. The enemy’s flight did not cease till they had crossed
the Chumbul and entirely evacuated Rajpootana. The force returned
northwards by easy marches, and the regiment reoccupied its former
quarters in the camp at Nusseerabad on the 29th of August.

On the 4th October the first half-yearly inspection of the regiment
which had taken place since April, 1857, was made by Major-General
Roberts, commanding Rajpootana Field Force, who was pleased to issue
a highly complimentary order to the regiment on this occasion.
Lieutenant-Colonel Steele was commanding and Lieutenant J. N. Colthurst
was adjutant.

[Sidenote: 1858.]

By order of her Majesty, published 18th August, 1858, a medal and
clasp was granted to all the troops engaged in field service in the
repression of the mutinies in India, and lists of those so entitled in
the regiment were forwarded on the 3rd and 4th November, 1858.

By order of the Governor-General in Council, dated 29th September,
1858, a donation of six months’ full batta was granted to all officers
and men who had served with the Rajpootana Field Force.

On October 26th, 1858, Colonel Botet Trydell was promoted
to major-general, and Major C. W. Austen succeeded to the
lieutenant-colonelcy in the regiment.

Major-General Trydell served in the 83rd for a period of fifty-four
years. He was present with the 1st Battalion at the taking of the Cape
of Good Hope in 1806, including the battle of Blueberg; and also in
Ceylon through the Kandyan rebellion.

Lieutenant-Colonel Steele having proceeded to England early in the
month of December, 1858, the command of the regiment devolved on
Lieutenant-Colonel Austen, the second lieutenant-colonel. On the 17th
of this month, a field force was formed at Nusseerabad under the
personal command of Brigadier Honner, commanding Rajpootana Field
Force, consisting of the head-quarters of the 83rd Regiment, 500
strong, under command of Lieutenant-Colonel C. Austen, with a troop and
a half-battery of artillery, a considerable force of cavalry of the 8th
Hussars and 1st Lancers, and the 12th Regiment N. I. The force marched
to Sanganeer on the Neemuch road, arriving there on the 21st. On the
23rd the head-quarters of the 83rd, 300 strong, with the 12th Regiment
N. I., and half a battery, were ordered back to Nusseerabad, arriving
there on the 27th. Three companies under Lieutenant-Colonel Heatly,
consisting of 200 men, remained with the brigade under Brigadier Honner.

[Sidenote: 1859.]

Early in the month of January, 1859, intelligence having been received
that the rebel force was again moving on Tonk, with the intention of
reaching Jeypoor, the head-quarters of the 83rd, with 300 men, part
of the 12th Regiment N. I., and half a battery of artillery, the
whole under the command of Lieutenant-Colonel Holmes, proceeded on
the 8th in an easterly direction to Diggee, to cover the road from
Tonk to Jeypoor. Having received information that Tonk was threatened,
the force marched through Tonk to Bamboor on the 11th; here it was
discovered that the rebels had passed by, and the force accordingly
marched the following day (twenty-two miles) in a north-east route to
Jullai. Finding that the rebels had only left that morning, and were
encamped at Chatsoo, twenty-two miles distant, the force marched again
that night, arriving at Chatsoo before daybreak. The rebels had just
left when the brigade of Brigadier Showers--chiefly cavalry--having
come up, continued the pursuit. Colonel Holmes’s force then marched
on Jeypoor, arriving there on the 17th and leaving on the 18th, and
after four days’ severe marching through deep sand, came up with the
rebel force at “Seekur” at 4 a.m., having during the last thirty hours
accomplished a march of fifty-two miles. The moon was just setting when
our troops surprised the rebel camp, and owing to the darkness and
precipitation with which the rebels fled, together with our deficiency
of cavalry, our troops were unable to inflict any serious loss on them.
About 80 were killed, 50 taken prisoners, and many horses and camels.
The force halted at Seekur for one day, having during the previous
thirteen days marched a distance of 292 miles. After this, the force
proceeded in combination with other columns to harass the rebels, and
marched over a great part of Jeypoor and Joudpoor, arriving finally on
the 18th February at Suget on the road between Nusseerabad and Deesa.
Information having been here received that the rebels had escaped
through a pass in the hills, the force, after a halt of four days,
returned to Nusseerabad, arriving there on the 1st March.

The field force, under Brigadier Honner, to which were attached 200 men
of the 83rd Regiment, under Lieutenant-Colonel Heatly, also returned on
the 1st March, having been in the field since the 14th December, during
which period they traversed 995 miles of country; and on one occasion,
in attempting to surprise the rebels, they marched forty-four miles
in twenty-four hours. In the pursuit of the rebels, terminating in
the affair of Kosana, Brigadier Honner’s force marched 130 miles, over
tracts of deep, heavy land, in four days. The 83rd detachment in this
last pursuit, consisting of 9 sergeants, 4 corporals, 1 drummer, and
119 privates, under command of Lieutenant-Colonel Heatly, with Captain
Marsh, Lieutenants Onslow and Huyshe, were mounted on camels. Their
services during the operations terminating in the defeat of the rebels
at “Koshana” are honourably mentioned in Brigadier Honner’s despatch.

In the summer of 1859 a letter was addressed by the Earl of Howth,
Lord-Lieutenant of the county of Dublin, to General Sir Frederick
Stovin, G.C.B. and K.C.M.G., the colonel of the regiment, which is
subjoined:--

                               “HOWTH CASTLE, _July 28th, 1859_.

   “SIR,--An application has been made to me by
   Lieutenant-Colonel Steele, of the 83rd Regiment, in my capacity
   of the Lord-Lieutenant of the county of Dublin, to give the
   assistance of my sanction and co-operation in forwarding an
   application from him as commanding officer of the 83rd Regiment,
   that the distinctive appellation of the ‘County of Dublin’
   Regiment may be conferred upon that corps. Lieutenant-Colonel
   Steele has suggested that I should communicate with you as
   the colonel of the 83rd on the subject of his wishes, and I
   accordingly beg to do so. Lieutenant-Colonel Steele accompanied
   his application to me by an extract from the records of the 83rd
   Regiment, and it most plainly appears that the regiment was
   raised in the county of Dublin in the year 1793, under a letter
   of service granted to its first lieutenant-colonel commandant,
   William Fitch, who was killed at the head of the regiment in the
   Maroon war, in the island of Jamaica, three years afterwards.
   It further appears from its records that the 83rd Regiment has
   seen much active foreign service, and has been distinguished
   by its discipline and valour in many parts of the world, and
   recently in the suppression of the mutiny in India, where it is
   at present serving.

   “Under these circumstances, and having regard to the fact that
   the regiment was originally raised exclusively in the county of
   Dublin, I have much pleasure in expressing my concurrence in the
   application made by Lieutenant-Colonel Steele on the part of his
   regiment. I consider that it would be creditable to the county
   of Dublin, that a regiment raised in it, and of whose services
   it may be very justly proud, should be distinguished by its
   name, and I give this letter to Lieutenant-Colonel Steele for
   conveyance to you, in the hope that it may aid in inducing his
   Royal Highness the Commander-in-Chief to recommend to her
   Majesty that the title of the ‘County of Dublin’ Regiment may be
   conferred on the 83rd.
                        “I have the honour, etc.,
                                          “(Signed) HOWTH.

     “To General Sir F. Stovin, G.C.B. and K.C.M.G.,
             Colonel 83rd Regiment.”


This application was brought to the notice of his Royal Highness the
Duke of Cambridge, Commander-in-Chief of the Army, by Sir F. Stovin,
and the title of the “County of Dublin” Regiment was conferred on the
83rd.

The following letter from the Adjutant-General reached the regiment at
Nusseerabad on the 19th December, 1859, just sixty-seven years after
the regiment had been raised in the county of Dublin:--

                         “HORSE GUARDS, S.W., _October 29th, 1859_.

   “SIR,--By desire of his Royal Highness the General
   Commanding-in-Chief, I have the honour to acquaint you that
   her Majesty has been graciously pleased to authorize the 83rd
   Regiment, which was raised principally from recruits obtained
   in Ireland in 1793, and embodied in Dublin in that year, being
   designated the 83rd (County of Dublin) Regiment.
                          “I have the honour, etc.,
                                “(Signed) W. F. FORSTER, D.A.-Gen.”


[Sidenote: 1860.]

The regiment remained at Nusseerabad and Ajmere till the end of
February, 1860, when they were ordered to proceed to Belgaum, in the
southern Mahratta country; and the head-quarters division, commanded
by Lieutenant-Colonel Austen, marched on the 17th February, reached
Cambay, distant 390 miles, on the 30th March, and proceeded by sea
to Vingorla, on the Malabar coast, whence they marched to Belgaum,
arriving there on the 16th April.

The left wing moved on the 30th March, under command of Captain
Baumgartner, and had a trying march in very hot weather, during which
they lost an officer (Lieutenant Colebrook) and several men from
cholera. They proceeded from Cambay by sea to Wagotna, and marched to
Kolapore, where they remained on detachment under command of Captain E.
B. Cooke.

A highly complimentary farewell order was issued to the regiment on the
occasion of its ceasing to belong to the Rajpootana Field Force, by
Brigadier Honner, C.B., commanding in Malwa and Rajpootana.
Lieutenant-Colonel Austen was then in command of the regiment.

The half-yearly inspection of the regiment was made by Brigadier Adams,
C.B., commanding the southern Mahratta division, on the 7th
November, 1860, at Belgaum.

The wing of the regiment which had been on detachment at Kolapore since
May, 1860, joined head-quarters on November 27th, 1860.

[Sidenote: 1861.]

The medals awarded by her Majesty to the officers and men who had been
engaged with the enemy during the Indian Mutiny were received from the
Adjutant-General, Horse Guards, on 2nd February, 1861, and on 11th
February they were presented to those entitled to them on a parade
of the garrison of Belgaum by Miss Straith, the step-daughter of the
brigadier commanding.

The officers of the regiment who were presented with the Indian war
medal were:--

    Lieut.-Col. Steele, C.B.
    Lieut.-Col. Heatly.
    Captain Pigott.
    Lieut.-Col. C. W. Austen.
    Captain Wright.
    Captain Wakefield.
    Captain Minhear.
    Captain Meurant.
    Captain Baumgartner.
    Captain Gandy.
    Captain Gore.
    Captain Molony.
    Adjutant J. N. Colthurst.
    Lieutenant Browne.
    Lieutenant Wardell.
    Lieutenant Onslow.
    Lieutenant Karslake.
    Lieutenant Healy.
    Lieutenant Coote.
    Lieutenant Beazley.
    Lieutenant Huyshe.
    Lieutenant Pennefather.
    Lieutenant Anderson.
    Paymaster Swinburne.
    Assistant-Surgeon Touch.
    Assistant-Surgeon W. Sharp.
    Quartermaster Hayes.
    Captain Sprot.

Lieutenant-Colonel Steele, who had commanded the regiment in several
engagements in the early part of the Mutiny, had been decorated by her
Majesty with the insignia of a Companion of the Bath for his services.

The half-yearly inspection of the regiment was made by Brigadier Adams,
C.B., commanding the southern Mahratta division on April 25th,
1861.

A frock of scarlet serge, and a wicker helmet covered with grey linen,
with a turban round it, were ordered to be adopted by the regiments in
India, in supersession of the shell jacket and chaco hitherto worn, and
the regiment was provided with them accordingly about this time.

Intimation was received in August that the regiment was to embark for
England in the approaching cold season. On the 18th November, his
Excellency Lieutenant-General Sir William Mansfield, K.C.B.,
Commander-in-Chief of the Bombay presidency, having visited Belgaum
on a tour of inspection, went through the barracks of the regiment,
and afterwards reviewed the 83rd on a brigade field-day, at the
conclusion of which he was pleased to make a speech to the regiment,
in which he expressed his approbation of the state of the corps in the
strongest terms; his Excellency used the words that “he never in the
course of his service had seen a regiment in higher order, and that
he should not fail to report accordingly to his Royal Highness the
Commander-in-Chief.”

Immediately afterwards the regiment was permitted by general order to
give volunteers for further service in India to every regiment serving
there, and a number of non-commissioned officers and men, as per
margin,[19] having volunteered to other regiments, were struck off the
strength of the 83rd from the 19th December, 1861.

[Sidenote: 1862.]

The regiment commenced its march to the coast on the 22nd January,
1862, and reached Vingorla on the 29th of that month, where they were
encamped till the 5th of February, on which day the regiment, under
command of Lieutenant-Colonel Steele, C.B., embarked in the
hired transport _King Lear_; the ship sailed the same evening for
Plymouth.

During the service of the regiment in India of 12½ years, it lost by
deaths 18 officers, 30 sergeants, 417 rank and file; and 51 sergeants
and 629 rank and file were invalided.

The _King Lear_ anchored in Table Bay, Cape of Good Hope, on the
morning of the 18th March, and having obtained supplies sailed again
for Gravesend, where the regiment disembarked on the 21st May, 1862,
and proceeded to Dover on the same day by rail, and was quartered in
the citadel.

The regiment was soon afterwards inspected by Brigadier-General
Garvock, commanding at Dover, and by Major-General Hon. A. A. Dalzell,
commanding the division.

Lieutenant-Colonel Edward Steele, C.B., sold out of the regiment on the
29th July, after a service of twenty-eight years in the 83rd. He died
in London on the 6th August, only eight days after he had been gazetted
out.

Major A. Barnard Hankey succeeded to the lieutenant-colonelcy of the
regiment.

In August the regiment was reviewed by Lieutenant-General Viscount
Melville, K.C.B., who commanded it for several years in Canada
and England.

Several drafts of recruits, both officers and men, joined head-quarters
from the depôt at Chatham, and brought up the strength of the regiment,
which had been reduced to a mere skeleton by the volunteering at
Belgaum, and the discharge of many men on its arrival at Dover.

In October the regiment was inspected on the Castle Hill parade
ground by H.R.H. the Duke of Cambridge, Commander-in-Chief, who, in a
complimentary speech, expressed his approval of its appearance, and of
the rapid manner in which the regiment had been brought forward since
its arrival in England.

In October a large number of the men were sent up to see the Great
Exhibition of 1862 by the officers.

[Sidenote: 1863.]

The 83rd remained quartered at Dover until the 23rd April, when
it marched to the camp at Shorncliffe, where it relieved the 69th
Regiment, which had been sent to the Cape, and was quartered in C lines.

In May the regiment was inspected by Brigadier-General Sutton,
Lieutenant-Colonel Hankey commanding.




                               PART VII

                  SERVICES OF THE REGIMENT, 1864–1907


Lieutenant Colthurst was promoted vice Baumgartner transferred to
Bombay Staff Corps, and Lieutenant Blunt appointed adjutant vice
Colthurst.

[Sidenote: 1864.]

In April the regiment under Lieutenant-Colonel Hankey moved to
Aldershot, and was quartered in the North Camp.

[Sidenote: 1865.]

The depôt of the regiment joined the regiment from Chatham, making the
strength up to twelve companies.

In April the head-quarters, seven companies, moved to Sheffield, and
the remaining five companies to Weedon.

In May two companies were sent to Bradford, in June one company to
York; the latter returned to head-quarters in September, and the former
in October.

In June and July detachments of the regiment were called upon to aid
the civil power during riots in connection with the elections at
Nottingham, Grantham, Lincoln, and Rotherham.

In October two companies were detached for duty at Tynemouth.

[Sidenote: 1866.]

In January the regiment embarked at Liverpool for Dublin, and was
consequently distributed as under:--

    Head-quarters        Curragh.
    Three companies      Armagh.
    One company          Monaghan.
    Two companies        Sligo.
    Two     „            Boyle.

In May the establishment was reduced to ten companies. Various changes
in the stations of the detachments took place during the year, but at
the end of the year the whole regiment moved to Richmond Barracks,
Dublin.

On 27th December the regiment was armed with breech-loading converted
Enfield rifles, Snider pattern.

[Sidenote: 1867.]

The depôt companies moved in March to Colchester, and in April the
regiment embarked at Kingstown, and was conveyed by the troopship
_Himalaya_ to Gibraltar, where it relieved the 86th Regiment in
the Casemate Barracks.

Lieutenant Tollemache died during April of this year.

On 9th May the regiment received the new colours, the presentation
being made by the Hon. Lady Airey.

[Sidenote: 1868.]

Lieutenant Cooke Collis was appointed adjutant vice Blunt promoted.

[Sidenote: 1869.]

Captain Luke O’Connor died at Glasgow.

[Sidenote: 1870.]

On 11th March the regiment, under Colonel A. B. Hankey, embarked on the
troopship _Tamar_ and proceeded to Alexandria, marched to Suez,
and embarked on the troopship _Euphrates_ on 25th March. Arriving
at Bombay on the 8th April, the regiment proceeded to Poona and was
quartered in Wanourie Barracks.

In April, Ensign W. De Hoghton died at St. Remo.

In June the establishment was altered to eight companies.

[Sidenote: 1871.]

Captain R. H. James died at Poona in April.

In November three companies proceeded on detachment to Bombay, two to
Sattara, and one to Asserghur.

On the 19th November, Colonel A. B. Hankey retired on half-pay, and was
succeeded by Lieutenant-Colonel J. S. Brown.

[Sidenote: 1872.]

On the 11th November the whole regiment was assembled at Bombay, to
provide guards of honour to Lord Northbrooke, the Viceroy, and for
a viceregal durbar to invest the Begum of Bhopal with the “Star of
India,” and proceeded on detachment again on completion of these duties.

The depôt companies, which had apparently now left Colchester, and were
stationed at Chatham, moved to Newry.

[Sidenote: 1873.]

[Sidenote: 1874.]

The whole regiment was assembled at Chinchivad to take part in
manœuvres, after which it left in December by rail to Ahmedabad, and
leaving one company on detachment there, marched to Deesa, arriving
there on 15th January. Companies were sent for change of air to Mount
Aboo.

The “Glengarry” cap was taken into wear on 14th December, in place of
one of the “Kilmarnock” pattern.

[Sidenote: 1875.]

Lieutenant G. Cleaveland died at Mount Aboo.

The depôt companies moved to Fermoy, and were attached to the 86th
Regiment.

Lieutenant G. Beresford shot himself at Deesa.

Two companies proceeded to Baroda on detachment in October, at which
place the regiment found guards of honour on the 18th and 23rd November
for the arrival and departure of H.R.H. the Prince of Wales.

[Sidenote: 1876.]

Lieutenant A. H. Oakeley died at Deesa on 10th October.

In December one company from Deesa and the three composing the
detachments at Ahmedabad and Baroda marched to Porebundur and embarked
on the I.G.S. _Dalhousie_ for Karachi; and then with the 50th
Regiment were sent, on account of smallpox, into camp at Jemadar Ha
Laudi.

[Sidenote: 1877.]

The head-quarters of the regiment marched from Deesa to Mandavi, and
arriving at this place (twenty-three marches) on 10th January, 1877,
proceeded on the _Dalhousie_ to Karachi, where they were joined by
the companies from camp.

In February two companies were sent on detachment to Hyderabad.

The depôt companies, now at the Curragh, moved to Aldershot.

[Sidenote: 1878.]

On 11th November telegraphic instructions were received at Karachi for
the regiment to be in readiness for field-service in Upper Sind.

[Sidenote: 1879.]

On 12th December, invalids, women, and children were sent, under
Lieutenant Bell, viâ Bombay to Ahmednagar, and on 21st December the
head-quarters (five companies), under Colonel T. S. Brown, proceeded
on service to Sukkur, where on 5th January, 1879, they were joined by
the three companies from Hyderabad, and on 30th January by a detachment
from home. Of this draft 83 men came from the linked battalion (86th
Foot).

The strength at Sukkur was then--20 officers, 41 sergeants, 15
drummers, and 779 men.

The regiment was encamped about 1½ miles south of Sukkur on the bank of
the Indus.

The regiment left Sukkur, by detachments, between 20th February and 5th
March, and returned by rail to Karachi, and was encamped on the Maidan.

On 13th March the regiment, under Colonel Brown, embarked on the
I.G.S.’s _Tenasserim_ and _Czarewitch_, and proceeded to
Vingorla, where the party from Ahmednagar joined it, and marched by
easy marches to Belgaum. One company was quartered in the fort and the
remainder in barracks.

On 29th September, Colonel Brown was appointed to the Brigade Staff
to command Sind District, and was succeeded in the command by
Lieutenant-Colonel E. Meurant.

[Sidenote: 1880.]

In February, two companies were sent on detachment to Sattara.

In September, as the regiment was about to proceed to England,
volunteers to the number of 82 rank and file were transferred to other
corps.

The detachment from Sattara returned to head-quarters in December.

[Sidenote: 1881.]

Instructions had been received in November that the regiment would
proceed to England in H.M.S. _Jumna_ on 25th January, 1881, but on
3rd January of that year, a telegram was received ordering the regiment
to Natal on field service owing to the outbreak of hostilities with the
Boers.

The regiment left Belgaum on 7th January, marched to Vingorla, and on
the 15th embarked on H.M.S. _Crocodile_ (on which were also the
Gordon Highlanders) for Durban; 46 invalids with the women and children
proceeded to Bombay _en route_ to England.

On 30th January the regiment, consisting of 20 officers, 574 rank and
file, landed at Durban, and proceeded by rail to standing camp at
Fillie Fontein; there it only remained for two weeks and then marched
to Pietermaritzburg, thence to the base of operations, Newcastle, where
it arrived on 9th March--a march rendered extremely difficult owing to
heavy rains.

During March, April, and May the regiment was variously encamped at
Signal Hill, Bennett’s Drift, and elsewhere, and employed wood-cutting,
coal-mining, etc.

On 1st July, the following changes took effect (General Order No. 41 of
1881):--

The regiment (83rd Foot) became the 1st Battalion Royal Irish Rifles.

The regiment (86th Foot) became the 2nd Battalion Royal Irish Rifles.

The Royal North Down Militia became the 3rd Battalion Royal Irish
Rifles.

The Antrim Militia became the 4th Battalion Royal Irish Rifles.

The Royal South Down Militia became the 5th Battalion Royal Irish
Rifles.

And by General Order No. 70 of 1881:--

The Louth Militia became the 6th Battalion Royal Irish Rifles.

The No. 83 was assigned to the Regimental District.

The uniform was changed to “green with light green facings,” and the
following badges and devices were added:--

“The Sphinx,” “The Harp and Crown.”

Motto--“Quis Separabit.”

Distinctions--“Egypt,” “India,” “Bourbon.”

In November, hostilities came to an end, and the force about Newcastle
was broken up.

The regiment marched from Bennett’s Drift on 7th November, arrived
at Pietermaritzburg on the 19th, and proceeded by train to Durban,
arriving on 21st November.

On 23rd November it embarked on H.M.S. _Tamar_ for England.

[Sidenote: 1882.]

On 3rd January the _Tamar_ arrived at Portsmouth. The regiment
disembarked next day and proceeded by rail to Dover, consisting of 15
officers and 489 rank and file.

On 14th March, H.R.H. the Duke of Cambridge inspected the regiment.

On 29th June, rifle uniform was taken into wear.

In August, owing to war in Egypt, the First Class Reserve was called
up, but demobilized again in October.

In September permission was received (General Order No. 252 of 1882)
for the regiment to “bear Cape of Good Hope 1806,” instead of “Cape of
Good Hope” on their appointments.

[Sidenote: 1883.]

The battalion remained at Dover.

[Sidenote: 1884.]

A detachment, under Captain H. H. Jackson, proceeded to Halifax, N.S.,
to join the 2nd Battalion.

On 13th August, the battalion, under Colonel Meurant, proceeded in
H.M.S. _Assistance_ to Guernsey, sending four companies to
Alderney.

On 5th October, Colonel Meurant was placed on half-pay, and was
succeeded in the command by Lieutenant-Colonel F. Karslake.

[Sidenote: 1885.]

A draft, under Lieutenants Welman and O’Leary, proceeded to Halifax,
N.S., to join the 2nd Battalion.

On 15th December, the battalion moved from Guernsey and Alderney to
Gosport.

[Sidenote: 1886.]

The battalion remained at Gosport.

[Sidenote: 1887.]

In February, Colonel Karslake was succeeded by Colonel C. J. Burnett
from the East Yorkshire Regiment.

On 7th July, the battalion proceeded to Aldershot to take part on 9th
July in the Jubilee Review, held on the completion of the fiftieth year
of reign of H.M. Queen Victoria. Strength present--19 officers and 617
rank and file, and was brigaded with 2nd Battalion Rifle Brigade and
2nd Battalion King’s Royal Rifles.

The battalion returned to Gosport on 12th July.

On 14th December, the battalion moved to Ireland and was stationed at
Mullingar, with a detachment at Sligo.

[Sidenote: 1888–9.]

The battalion remained at Mullingar.

[Sidenote: 1890.]

Colonel Burnett having been appointed A.A. General at Aldershot,
Lieutenant-Colonel H. D. Cutbill, from half-pay, succeeded to the
command.

In July, the battalion moved to the Curragh for drills, and in August
to “New Barracks,” Fermoy, with a detachment of one company at Fort
Carlisle, Queenstown.

[Sidenote: 1891.]

A rifle busby was sanctioned and taken into wear on Christmas Day.

[Sidenote: 1892.]

Captain Curzon was appointed adjutant vice Wilkinson.

[Sidenote: 1893.]

The battalion moved from Fermoy to Newry on 19th June, sending a
detachment in October to Drogheda.

[Sidenote: 1894.]

A field-service cap was taken into use in place of the Glengarry, which
had been worn since 1874.

On 4th June, Major R. J. Knox was promoted lieutenant-colonel, and
succeeded to the command vice Cutbill, whose four years of command had
terminated.

On 16th October, the battalion moved to Brighton. Strength--20 officers
and 784 rank and file, sending two companies as a detachment to
Chichester.

[Sidenote: 1895.]

The regiment was armed with Lee-Enfield rifles, Mark II.

[Sidenote: 1896.]

Lieutenant O. C. Baker was appointed adjutant on 1st January, vice
Captain Curzon, whose tenure expired.

On 27th April, Lieutenant King-Harman with 1 colour-sergeant, 1
sergeant, and 25 men, proceeded to South Africa as part of an Irish
company of mounted infantry for service in Matabeleland.

On 21st September, the battalion, numbering 16 officers, 586 rank and
file, moved by rail to Aldershot, and was quartered in Ramillies’
Barracks.

On 3rd November, Lieutenant-Colonel C. Haggard succeeded to the
command vice Lieutenant-Colonel R. J. Knox.

[Sidenote: 1897.]

On 9th January, Lieutenant-General H.R.H. the Duke of Connaught
commanding Aldershot District inspected the battalion. Captain O’Leary
received and was permitted to wear the 4th Class Order of the Osmanieh,
for services in the Dongola expedition.

On 24th April, the battalion embarked at Southampton on the transport
_Dunera_ for South Africa, and having disembarked at Durban on
24th May--strength 20 officers, 593 rank and file, 37 women, and 51
children--proceeded by rail to Ladysmith.

On 25th May the detachment under Lieutenant King-Harman rejoined
head-quarters. This detachment had been employed on service for
thirteen months with head-quarters at Fort Salisbury, and had had 1
man wounded. It received the thanks of the G.O.C. Natal and Zululand
for “their soldierly qualities and good behaviour,” and subsequently
received a medal for service in Rhodesia.

On 27th September, the battalion was put into khaki clothing.

[Sidenote: 1898.]

On 10th August, a Maxim machine gun was issued to the battalion.

[Sidenote: 1899.]

On 24th March, the battalion left Ladysmith for Durban, where it
embarked on R.I.M.S. _Clive_ for Calcutta, and arriving on 15th
April, it proceeded to Dum Dum.

On 18th September, the head-quarters moved to Fort William, Calcutta.

War with the Boers in South Africa having broken out, Captain
Fox-Strangways and Lieutenant Eckford were sent there for service on
18th September, and on 20th September, 1 sergeant and 14 men also went
as trained transport drivers.

[Sidenote: 1900.]

On 1st January, Lieutenant Macnamara succeeded to the adjutancy vice
Baker, whose tenure expired.

On 1st February, Captain Noblett and 1 sergeant were attached to
Lumsden’s Horse, a volunteer Mounted Infantry Corps, and proceeded to
South Africa.

On 28th October, Lieutenant-Colonel A. T. Swaine succeeded to the
command vice Haggard.

On 18th December, Lieutenant G. Forbes died from enteric fever.

[Sidenote: 1901.]

Captain Noblett and 1 sergeant returned to duty from South Africa. This
officer was mentioned in despatches.

The battalion remained at Calcutta.

[Sidenote: 1902.]

On 3rd February, the battalion moved to Fyzabad.

On 14th February, 4 sergeants, 6 corporals, and 139 privates left from
Bombay to join the 2nd Battalion on service in South Africa.

On 10th March, Lieutenant Low was killed in action in South Africa.

On 14th March, Major F. J. Tobin, who had joined as second-in-command,
was decorated on parade with the Distinguished Service Order for
service in South Africa.

On 18th November, the battalion went to Delhi and took part in the
great Durbar held for the proclamation of H.M. King Edward VII as
Emperor of India, and the following officers, warrant officers,
N.C.O.’s, and riflemen received the coronation medal given for this
occasion:--

    Lieut.-Col. Swaine.
    Major Tobin, D.S.O.
    Lieut. Dunn.
    Sgt.-Major Foster.
    Bd.-Major Williams.
    Colour Sergt. Cowden.
    Colour Sergt. Elphick.
    Corporal Verdon.
    Rifleman Heron.

Subsequently it took part in manœuvres near Delhi, and returned to
Fyzabad on 21st January, 1903.

[Sidenote: 1903.]

On 20th August, Sergeant Bingham went on service to Somaliland.

Sergeant-Major Foster was promoted Quartermaster on 9th November.

[Sidenote: 1904.]

On 1st January, Captain H. R. Charley succeeded Captain Macnamara as
adjutant.

On 20th May, a machine-gun detachment of 1 sergeant and 6 men under
Lieutenant Bowen-Colthurst proceeded to Thibet with the mission under
Brigadier-General (afterwards Sir) R. Macdonald, C.B., and
subsequently received a medal for this service.

On 28th October, Colonel Swaine completed his tenure of command and was
succeeded by Lieutenant-Colonel J. S. Brown.

[Sidenote: 1905.]

On 15th December the battalion left Fyzabad and marched to Meerut, 351
miles, arriving on 1st January. _En route_ two companies were
detached for duty at Delhi.

On 30th November the battalion left by train for Rawal Pindi and took
part in manœuvres and review on the occasion of the visit of T.R.H.’s
the Prince and Princess of Wales.

During 1905–7 the battalion remained at Meerut, having a detachment at
Delhi, and (during the hot seasons) at Chakrata and Landour.

[Sidenote: 1906.]

Lieutenant Robinson died at Meerut.

[Sidenote: 1907.]

In January the battalion went to Agra and took part in a review held in
honour of a visit to India of H.M. the Ameer of Afghanistan.

On 6th March, Captain Charley’s tenure of the adjutancy expired and
Lieutenant H. R. Goodman was appointed.

   _The following is a_ LIST _of all_ OFFICERS KILLED _and_ WOUNDED
       _in the Regiment since it was raised in 1793_.


                                KILLED.

    Colonel William Fitch           Maroon War.
    Lieutenant-Colonel Gordon       Talavera.
            „          Collins      Salamanca.
    Major Widrington                Vittoria.
    Brevet Major Hon. Powys         Talavera.
    Captain Lee                     Maroon War.
       „    Fry                     Badajos.
       „    Samuel Read             Jeerun, India.
    Lieutenant Montgomery           Talavera.
         „     Dahman                  Do.
         „     Flood                   Do.
         „     Ferris               Fuentes d’Onor.
         „     Lindsay              Vittoria.
         „     Bloxham                 Do.
         „     Johnson              Canada.
         „     Low                  South Africa.
    Ensign Hackett                  Peninsula.


                               WOUNDED.

    Lieutenant-Colonel Collins     Albuera.
            „          Carr        Orthes.
    Major Blaquiere                  Do.
    Captain Venables              Vittoria.
       „    Brunt                 Maroon War.
       „    Summerfield           Talavera.
       „    Reynolds                Do.
       „    Elliott               Orthes.
       „    Venables                Do.
    Lieutenant Abel                Talavera.
         „     Johnstone             Do.
         „     Nicholson             Do.
         „     Pine                  Do.
         „     Boggie                Do.
         „     Baldwin               Do.
         „     Ferris                Do.
         „     Colthurst           Busaco.
         „     Vereker             Fuentes d’Onor.
         „     Matthews            Ciudad Rodrigo.
         „     Vereker               Do.
         „     Broomfield          Badajos.
         „     O’Neill               Do.
         „     Bowles                Do.
         „     Lane                  Do.
         „     Vavasour              Do.
         „     Baldwin               Do.
         „     Gascoigne           Salamanca.
         „     Smith               Vittoria.
         „     Baldwin               Do.
         „     Barry                 Do.
         „     Watson              Nivelle.
         „     Barry                 Do.
         „     Wyatt                 Do.
         „     Baldwin             Orthes.
         „     Watson                Do.
         „     Lane                  Do.
         „     Hingstone           Vic Bigorre.
         „     Lane                  Do.
    Lieut. and Adj. Swinburne      Orthes.
    Adjutant Brahan                Talavera.
    Lieut. and Adj. J. Swinburne     Do.
    Ensign Nugent                  Orthes.
       „   Burgess                 Nivelle.
       „   A. Tulloch              Talavera.
       „   Barry                     Do.
       „   Carey                     Do.
       „   Irwin                     Do.
    Assistant-Surgeon Miles        Nimbharia.


                                TOTAL.

                                 Killed.  Wounded.
    Lieutenant-Colonels             3        2
    Majors                          2        1
    Captains                        3        6
    Lieutenants                     7       31
    Ensigns                         1        7
    Surgeons                        0        1
                                   --       --
                                   16       48


                             GRAND TOTAL.

                                 Killed.  Wounded.
    Officers                       16       48
    Sergeants and rank and file   279      810
                                  ---      ---
                                  295      858
                                  ===      ===

   LIST OF OFFICERS _who have served in the 83rd Regiment, compiled
       from the “Officers Records,” preserved in the Regimental Orderly
       Room_.

       COLONELS COMMANDING.                 REMARKS.
    William Fitch                  1793: Colonel Commandant.
    James Balfour                  1795: Major-General.
    John Hodgson                   1823: Major-General.
    Hastings Fraser, C.B.          1835: Major-General.
    Sir Fred. Stovin, O.C.B,
       K.C.M.G.                    1848: Lieutenant-General
    E. P. Buckley                  1865: General. Died 29th May, 1873.
    W. G. Brown                    1873: General. Died 27th Nov., 1883.
    W. H. Bradford                 Lieutenant-General.

    COLONELS OR LIEUTENANT-COLONELS
           COMMANDING.
    William Fitch                  Killed in the Maroon War.
    William Sleigh
    Thomas Gibson
    Sir Edward Baynes
    William Godley
    John Byne Skerritt
    Joseph Baird
    William Hutchinson
    Alexander Gordon               Killed at Talavera.
    Richard Collins                Killed at Salamanca.
    Jacob Blunt
    John Potter Hamilton
    Sir Henry William Carr
    Charles Cother                 Retired, 1829.
    ---- Bunbury
    Hon. H. Dundas, C.B.           Retired on half-pay, 1842.
    B. Trydell                     Brevet Colonel, promoted to
                                     Major-General, 1856.
    W. H. Law                      Retired on full pay, as
                                     Major-General, 1856.
    J. Kelsall                     Retired on full pay, as Colonel,
                                     1858.
    Edward Steele, C.B.            Retired July, 1862. Died in London,
                                     6th August, 1862.
    Charles W. Austen              Exchanged to 14th Regiment.
    A. Barnard Hankey              Retired 2nd August, 1871.
    T. S. Brown                    To Brigade Staff 28th February,
                                     1880.
    E. Meurant                     Retired 5th October, 1884.
    F. Karslake                    Retired 12th February, 1887.
    C. J. Burnett                  To Staff 4th June, 1890.
    H. D. Cutbill                  Retired 4th June, 1894.
    R. J. Knox                     Retired 28th October, 1896.
    C. Haggard                     Retired 28th October, 1900.
    A. T. Swaine                   Retired 28th October, 1904.
    J. S. Brown                    Now commanding.

      LIEUTENANT-COLONELS.
    S. Flower                      Retired 5th October, 1888.
    C. G. Gore                     Retired 10th January, 1883.
    R. O. De Montmorency           To 2 R.I.R. 10th January, 1883.

        MAJORS.
    T. Summerfield                 Died at Limerick, 1834.
    Peter Crofton                  Retired.
    Joseph Swinburne               Brevet Lieutenant-Colonel, retired
                                     as Colonel, 1853. Died, 1860.
    Edward Townsend                Died of cholera at Kurrachee, 1851.
    Henry F. Ainslie               Retired as Lieut.-Col. on full pay,
                                     1855.
    Henry Lloyd                    Died of cholera at Cambay, 1854.
    John Heatley                   Brevet Lieutenant-Colonel; exchanged
                                     to 69th Regiment.
    James F. Murray                Exchanged to 97th Regiment, 1862.
    Edward B. Cooke                Retired, 1862.
    Henry De R. Pigott             Exchanged to 19th Regiment, 1863.
    Thomas Venables
    Robert Bates
    J. S. Wakefield                Brevet Lieutenant-Colonel; retired
                                     7th August, 1878.
    F. A. Wright                   Retired 18th January, 1882.
    E. A. Butler                   Retired 18th April, 1885.
    J. P. B. Forster               Retired 16th September, 1868.
    G. G. Beazley                  Retired 12th March, 1881.
    C. J. Wyndham                  Transferred to 2 R.I.R. 18th Sept.,
                                     1888.
    B. H. Metcalfe                 Retired 31st December, 1887.
    H. H. Stuart                   To 2 R.I.R., 1889.
    W. Cooke Collis                Promoted half-pay Lieutenant-Colonel,
                                     and retired 4th May, 1892.
    F. S. F. Stokes                Transferred to 2 R.I.R., 1st August,
                                     1890.
    J. J. Meynell                  Retired 2nd March, 1893.
    H. A. Eager                    Transferred to 2 R.I.R., December,
                                     1895.
    W. Ayde                        To Staff, 25th March, 1898.
    E. Allen                       Exchanged to 2 R.I.R, 29th April,
                                     1899.
    F. J. Tobin                    Promoted into 2 R.I.R., 28th July,
                                     1904.
    W. J. McWhinnie                Retired 21st September, 1906.
    F. E. P. Curzon                Appointed second-in-command 2 R.I.R.,
                                     13th July, 1905.
    W. E. O’Leary
    H. M. Cliff                    Retired 17th October, 1902.
    K. Beresford
    F. J. H. Bell
    C. E. R. Harvey
    G. B. Laurie                   Exchanged to 2 R.I.R.
    A. V. Weir
    O. C. Baker

       CAPTAINS.
    Henry Caulfield                Removed to 58th Foot, 1833.
    Francis Johnston               Retired, 1834.
    Aretas S. Young                Exchanged to 63rd Regiment, 1835.
    John Richardson                Retired, 1840.
    Robert Colquohoun              Died in London, 1841.
    John Harrison                  Half-pay, 1839.
    Robert Kelly                   Sold out, 1839.
    J. H. Anstruther               Sold out, 1839.
    George Grey                    Sold out, 1840.
    John Rayson                    Sold out, 1841.
    Denis McC. Stubbeman           Sold out, 1845.
    John Emslie                    Sold out, 1844.
    Edward D’Alton                 Half-pay.
    Thomas St. Aubyn               Died at Putney, 1846.
    Benjamin H. Brown              Retired, 1847.
    Duncan Campbell                Exchanged to 90th Regiment, 1848.
    William Garston                Half-pay, 1849.
    D. R. De Rinzy                 Half-pay, 1849; died of cholera same
                                     year.
    Hon. William Gage              Died at Poona, 1849.
    D. W. P. Labalmondiere         Half-pay, 1850.
    S. H. F. Cary                  Exchanged to 31st Regiment, 1850.
    David Anderson                 Exchanged to 22nd Regiment.
    Frederick Woodgate             Retired, 1848.
    Thomas Spring                  Exchanged to 35th Regiment, 1851.
    Samuel B. Lamb                 Exchanged to 10th Regiment, 1851.
    Thomas Adams                   Exchanged to 78th Regiment, 1854.
    Frederick George Moore         Half-pay, 1855.
    Thomas M. Keogh                Retired, 1856.
    William Mills Molony           Exchanged to 22nd Regiment.
    Samuel Read                    Killed in action at Jeerun, 1857.
    Robert Colville Jones          Died at Ahmedabad, 1857.
    William Nott                   Died near Birmingham, 1858.
    Herbert Stanley Cooper         Died at Nusseerabad, 1858.
    Hon. E. G. W. Forester         Half-pay, 1858.
    Robert H. P. Crawford          Exchanged to 90th Regiment; died in
                                     Crimea.
    John Sharman Molony            Removed to Staff--Falkland Islands.
    Richard R. Wyvill              Retired, 1860.
    Thomas Parker Wright           Staff officer of pensioners.
    F. H. D. Marsh                 Exchanged to 89th Regiment.
    Henry Gandy                    Retired, 1860.
    Retired J. Sweeney             Half-pay.
    T. Mowbray Baumgartner         Transferred to Bombay Staff Corps,
                                     1861.
    James Verling Ellis            Exchanged to Ceylon Rifles, 1862.
    William Minhear                Retired, 1863.
    F. Pemberton Campbell          Exchanged to 14th Hussars, 1863.
    Frederick Dickenson            Retired, 1863.
    Edward William Bray            Brevet major.
    John Sprot
    Edward Meurant
    Julian Wakefield
    Chas. C. Gore
    James F. Sweeney
    Geo. G. Beazley
    Geo. L. Huyshe
    William H. Ivimy
    Lawrence Mackenzie
    G. F. Stehelin                 Retired 6th November, 1868.
    J. K. S. Henderson             Retired 9th April, 1890.
    L. E. O’Connor                 Died 10th January, 1869.
    G. P. Fawkes                   Retired 29th June, 1870.
    P. C. Browne                   Exchanged to 23rd Foot 2nd May, 1869.
    J. F. Wyse
    W. C. Strickland               Retired 28th October, 1871.
    C. L. Smith                    Retired 30th April, 1873.
    G. E. E. Blunt                 Retired 5th January, 1870.
    F. H. A. D. Roebuck            Exchanged to 46th Foot 20th July,
                                     1870.
    E. G. Johnson                  Retired 28th May, 1870.
    R. H. James                    Died at Poona 4th April, 1871.
    G. N. Stevenson                Exchanged to 91st Foot 31st Oct.,
                                     1871.
    G. W. Cockburn                 Retired 30th September, 1870.
    G. E. S. Cartwright            Retired 10th February, 1877.
    C. J. Shorburn                 Retired 5th November, 1884.
    W. Stewart                     Retired 9th June, 1877.
    T. F. Gibbs                    Retired 19th October, 1878.
    H. C. Bond                     Died 27th March, 1882.
    C. T. Davenport                To Army Pay Dept. 26th August, 1881.
    J. A. R. Bell                  To Army Pay Dept. 12th April, 1881.
    J. W. H. Anson                 Superseded 19th July, 1882.
    W. B. Marling                  Resigned 16th January, 1884.
    E. C. L. Walter                Died at Alderney 4th May, 1885.
    R. Taylor                      Retired 11th July, 1884.
    R. S. Graves                   To Army Pay Dept. 9th December, 1885.
    Hon. F. L. Colborne            Brevet Major to Staff, April, 1885.
    M. E. Mulchinock               Resigned 17th August, 1887.
    C. G. Harris                   Retired 10th August, 1888.
    L. T. V. Wilkinson             Retired 20th February, 1895.
    A. W. Raymond                  To 2 R.I.R. 1st February, 1888.
    W. H. Dunlop                   To 2 R.I.R. 20th May, 1892.
    H. L. Welman                   To Militia, Adjutant 20th Nov., 1893.
    G. O. Callaghan Westrapp       Retired 20th February, 1889.
    J. E. Hodges                   To Army Pay Department 1st July,
                                     1893.
    W. G. Lillingston              To half-pay 12th July, 1896.
    R. A. D. Rowley                Died 19th November, 1898.
    G. W. W. D’Arcy Evans          To 20th Hussars 10th June, 1895.
    P. M. H. Carew                 Retired 3rd July, 1897.
    T. S. Fox-Strangways           To Staff 22nd October, 1899
                                     (retired).
    A. F. Ryan                     Resigned 24th August, 1898.
    H. F. R. Despard               Retired 15th August, 1902.
    W. E. O. C. Blunt              To Army Pay Department 29th April,
                                     1908.
    T. Carson                      To Adjutant 5 R.I.R. 22nd February,
                                     1900 (retired).
    A. J. B. Addison               To Adjutant, Artists’ Vols.
                                     (retired).
    B. H. M. Fox                   To A.S.C. 15th October, 1900.
    P. G. W. Eckford               Adjutant, Vols. 14th November, 1905.
    H. G. Breman                   To half-pay 8th May, 1902 (retired).
    D. W. Silwell                  Brevet Major. Exchanged to 2 R.I.R.
                                     10th October, 1903.
    L. H. Noblett                  Brevet Major. Promoted to 2 R.I.R.,
                                     1907.
    H. R. Charley                  To 2 R.I.R. 6th March, 1907.
    L. C. Sprague                  To 2 R.I.R.
    C. C. Macnamara
    J. H. Alston
    B. Allgood
    E. G. Dunn
    E. H. Saunders, D.S.O.         To Sr. T. Corps 24th November, 1905.
    R. H. S. Dashwood              Retired 21st December, 1907.
    C. H. Dixon                    To 2 R.I.R.
    L. G. B. Rodney
    E. C. Monro
    J. C. Bowen-Colthurst


      LIEUTENANTS.
    Edward De Visme                Retired, 1831.
    Henry S. G. Bowles             Died at Ballinrobe, 1832.
    George Blakeney                Retired, 1835.
    John J. E. Hamilton            Retired, 1837.
    W. S. Johnson                  Killed in action at Prescott, 1838.
    Hanway Howard                  Retired, 1837.
    W. S. Ducie                    Retired, 1838.
    C. T. Egerton                  Retired, 1839.
    Roger Coghlan                  Died in Dublin, 1834.
    William J. Nunn                Half-pay.
    James Goodrich                 Retired, 1839.
    Hon. R. H. Clifford            Killed from his horse at Limerick,
                                     1833.
    T. Taubman James               Retired.
    Francis W. Bowles              Exchanged to 94th, 1837.
    Wenman Wynniatt                Drowned at London, Canada, 1841.
    James Clerk                    Exchanged to 9th Light Dragoons.
    James Foster                   Exchanged to 1st Dragoon Guards.
    William Blackburne             To 91st Regiment.
    Thomas Stewart Lane            Died at Castlecomer, 1848.
    Walter Hamilton                Retired, 1845.
    Francis J. Hext                Retired, 1845.
    John W. Crowe                  Retired 1849.
    John William Wellington        Exchanged to 4th Light Dragoons,
                                     1847.
    Sir Richard Gethin, Bart.      Retired, 1846.
    James Sadler Naylor            Exchanged to 8th Hussars, 1846.
    John T. Downman                Retired, 1849.
    W. Sandford Wills              Exchanged to 5th Dragoon Guards.
    Lord Alfred S. Churchill       Retired, 1848.
    H. P. Villiers Villiers        Retired, 1855.
    W. C. Sheills                  Retired, 1852.
    Chas. Peregrine Teesdale       Promoted to 55th Regiment, 1855.
    S. W. F. M. Wilson             Do.
    John Meade                     Promoted to 30th Regiment, 1856.
    John Norris McKelvey           Died at Deesa, 1856.
    Braithwaite Chamley            Exchanged to 17th Lancers, 1858.
    Thomas Rowland                 Exchanged to 1st Regiment, 1853.
    Usher W. Alcock                Retired, 1855.
    Marmaduke N. Richardson        Retired, 1853.
    William Fitzroy                Promoted into 63rd Regiment, 1855.
    John W. Huskisson              Transferred to 56th Regiment, 1855.
    Stephen W. Metge               Died at sea, 1856.
    J. R. A. Colebrook             Died at Mysana, 1860.
    G. W. H. Wardell               Retired, 1861.
    Guildford M. Onslow            Retired, 1861.
    John Healey                    Exchanged to 66th Regiment, 1862.
    Edwin Thomas                   Retired, 1862.
    R. Kenneth Gibb                Exchanged to 1st West India Regiment,
                                     1863.
    H. G. Davies                   Exchanged to 96th Regiment, 1863.
    James E. Brymer                Drowned at Hythe, 1863.
    William K. Bookey              Retired, 1863.
    George Dunlevie                Half-pay, 1857.
    Alfred Holt                    Promoted into 81st Regiment, 1855.
    Thomas G. Coote
    Peter C. Browne
    Nicholas Pennefather
    Frederick Karslake
    W. Forbes Anderson             Died at Sandgate, 1863.
    Hubert C. Whitlock
    Michael Murphy
    Littleton A. Powys
    James Geo. Scott
    Henry Albert Fuller
    Walter C. Strickland
    Frederick Augustus Wright
    Charles Lucius Smith
    Charles Hay Tollemache
    John Olphert Gage
    Thos. E. B. Townsend
    C. Horrocks                    Retired 7th November, 1868.
    H. L. Parry                    Retired 1st February, 1873.
    T. P. Powell                   Retired 26th July, 1873.
    H. W. Walker                   Transferred to 2nd 19th Foot.
    H. V. H. Brooke                Exchanged to 33rd Foot 1st December,
                                     1869.
    M. O. Kirkward                 Retired 16th March, 1861.
    W. F. Marriott                 Exchanged to 41st Foot, 1875.
    A. Fawcett                     Retired 8th July, 1868.
    J. W. Anderson                 To Bombay Staff Corps, 11th July,
                                     1874.
    F. Bruce                       Transferred to 39th Foot.
    A. Chichester                  Exchanged to 95th Foot, 31st August,
                                     1870.
    W. De Hogton                   Died at S. Remo, 29th April, 1870.
    R. W. S. Burnett               Retired 10th July, 1872.
    Hon. E. F. Gifford             Exchanged to 2nd 24th Foot, 25th
                                     February, 1873.
    C. W. Hinde                    To Bombay Staff Corps, 7th February,
                                     1873.
    J. H. Hardtman Berckley        Transferred to 107th Regiment, 15th
                                     January, 1876.
    L. F. Heath                    To Indian Staff Corps, 1871.
    C. G. B. Hervey                To Indian Staff Corps, 1878.
    G. Cleaveland                  Died at Mount Aboo, 19th March, 1895.
    G. A. Beresford                Died at Deesa, 8th June, 1875.
    P. A. Buckland                 To Bengal Staff Corps, 24th April,
                                     1875.
    H. F. Cadell                   To Madras Staff Corps, 36th November,
                                     1876.
    C. St. L. Wilkinson            Retired 25th November, 1874.
    A. C. G. Mayne                 To I.S.C., 1st September, 1877.
    J. W. Hogge                    To I.S.C., 23rd May, 1876.
    C. H. W. Alexander             Resigned 30th October, 1878.
    H. E. W. Beville               To I.S.C., 14th December, 1875.
    A. W. Ancketill                Resigned 7th June, 1875.
    H. Read                        To Bengal Staff Corps.
    H. B. Warden                   To Bombay Staff Corps, 1876.
    J. M. Johnstone                Retired 26th November, 1879.
    A. D. Enriquerz                To I.S.C., 29th November, 1881.
    H. Mansfield                   To I.S.C., 5th August, 1878.
    G. F. N. Ginley                To Bombay Staff Corps.
    D. Cole                        To I.S.C., 19th July, 1878.
    L. B. H. Baker                 To I.S.C.
    W. D. Thomson                  To I.S.C., 29th August, 1882.
    G. R. D. Westrapp              To I.S.C., 26th April, 1880.
    J. F. Trant                    Exchanged to 2nd West India Regiment,
                                     2nd August, 1882.
    G. V. Burrows                  To I.S.C.
    R. W. F. Monteith              To A.S.C., 18th April, 1885.
    A. P. S. Barnett               To I.S.C., 16th March, 1882.
    E. A. Kettlewell               To I.S.C., 18th December, 1880.
    W. G. Alban                    To I.S.R., 9th November, 1880.
    W. Browne
    M. A. Tighe
    H. F. Battersby                Retired 29th October, 1883.
    J. Fisher                      To 2nd Norfolk Regt., 7th Nov., 1883.
    C. H. Orpen                    Resigned 29th June, 1887.
    J. R. Gray                     To K.R. Rifles, 18th January, 1886.
    H. R. Homfray                  Transferred to 1st Life Guards, 7th
                                     November, 1888.
    J. F. Stewart                  Transferred to S. Rifles, 14th April,
                                     1883.
    G. W. Paliu                    Transferred to North Stafford
                                     Regiment, 12th June, 1883.
    A. W. Hasted                   Transferred to 2nd Wilts Regiment,
                                     25th August, 1885.
    J. H. Lowry                    To I.S.C., 5th May, 1887.
    F. F. Bradshaw                 To I.S.C., 2nd March, 1887.
    G. W. Massey                   Promoted into 2nd Battalion, 2nd
                                     March, 1893.
    A. P. M. Burke                 Resigned 2nd March, 1903.
    E. W. H. Somerset              To Rifle Brigade, 3rd August, 1887.
    A. H. Festing                  To Royal Niger Coy., 29th July, 1885.
    G. S. Carey                    Transferred to 2nd R.I. Rifles, 23rd
                                     July, 1895. Died at Poona.
    M. S. D. Westrapp              Resigned 8th June, 1898.
    H. L. Low                      Killed on service with 2nd R.I.
                                     Rifles in South Africa, 10th May,
                                     1902.
    W. A. King Harmen
    H. Wilding                     Resigned 14th September, 1898.
    R. L. Hughes Hallett           To Indian Army, 3rd October, 1900.
    A. G. Forbes                   Died at Dum Dum, 18th December, 1900.
    C. S. Dixon                    Promoted into 2nd R.I. Rifles.
    C. L. W. Wallace               Resigned 13th June, 1905.
    A. S. Kirkwood                 To S. and T. Corps, 1st November,
                                     1906.
    W. M. Lanyon
    A. J. Biscoe
    H. R. Goodman
    W. M. Culloch                  Resigned, 1907.
    F. Robinson                    Died at Meerut, 11th April, 1906.
    Hon. B. A. Forbes
    E. M. A. J. Hogan
    G. A. Chatterton
    P. F. J. Smith
    J. F. Martyr
    C. C. Tee
    Geo. H. Cazalet                Promoted to 18th Regiment.
    Robert Portal                  Promoted to 41st Regiment.
    T. G. L. Carew Gwyn            Exchanged to 6th Dragoon Guards,
                                     1847.
    W. T. Riley                    To 52nd Regiment.
    William A. Riddell             Retired.
    H. M. Scott                    Died at Manchester, 1832.
    Frederick Ford                 Retired, 1858.
    James Pringle                  Promoted.
    Thomas Graham                  Died at Kurrachee, 1852.
    Graham Mylne                   Promoted to 82nd Regiment.
    William Blathway               Killed accidentally at Ilfracombe,
                                     1859.
    Geo. E. E. Blunt
    Henry Geo. Wilson
    A. Goring Bridger
    Henry Church
    James M. Lyall
    Sir Keith G. Jackson, Bart.
    R. O. De Montmorency
    John Blurton
    Anthony McClymont              Died at Deesa, 1856.
    A. Crowley                     Transferred to 48th Foot 1st May,
                                     1878.
    H. B. Brown                    Transferred to 2 R.I.R. 27th May,
                                     1888.
    C. Gosling                     Transferred to K.R.R. 28th Nov.,
                                     1888.
    H. M. Biddulph                 Transferred to Rifle Brigade, 6th
                                     February, 1889.
    J. Murray                      Died 25th October, 1898.
    C. B. L. Clery                 To I.S.C.
    R. G. Baker                    To I.C.S. 15th January, 1900.
    R. C. Wilson                   Resigned 1st October, 1901.
    H. A. Gaussen                  Resigned 7th April, 1906.
    L. Pilkington                  Resigned 1st November, 1901.
    T. H. Barton                   To Indian Army 16th November, 1903.
    H. N. Jones                    Exchanged to 2 R.I.R. 8th August,
                                     1903.
    A. H. Parsons                  To Indian Army.
    G. S. Scott
    E. C. Kenny                    To Indian Army, 1903.
    E. R. Ludlow Hewitt
    N. Hutcheson
    R. O. Mansergh
    E. De W. Waller
    A. W. Galway

      PAYMASTERS.
    Richard Brough                 Retired, 1849.
    John Denis Swinburne
    F. Fereday                     Exchanged to 95th Foot, 31st Oct.,
                                     1871.
    F. Scrivener                   Transferred to A.P.D. 1st April,
                                     1878.

       ADJUTANTS.
    John Stubbs                    Died at Kingston, 1840.
    B. H. Browne                   Promoted.
    William Nott                   Do.
    William Hall                   Died at Kurrachee, 1851.
    Edward H. M. Mainwaring        Died at Poona, 1856.
    James Nicholas Colthurst
    G. E. E. Blunt
    W. Coake Collis                27th June, 1871.
    H. H. Berkeley                 To 21st November, 1875.
    F. S. F. Stokes                To 19th October, 1878.
    W. B. Marling                  To 16th December, 1882.
    J. S. Brown                    To 26th April, 1886.
    F. J. H. Bell                  To 25th May, 1890.
    L. T. V. Wilkinson             To 1st January, 1892.
    F. E. P. Curzon                To 31st December, 1895.
    O. C. Baker                    To 31st December, 1899.
    C. C. Macnamara                To 31st December, 1903.
    H. R. Charley                  To 31st December, 1906.
    H. R. Goodman


      QUARTERMASTERS.
    John Rusher                    Retired, 1838.
    Robert Imray                   Retired, 1844.
    Joseph Cartmail                Exchanged to 3rd Regiment, 1847.
    William Colburn                Died at Poona, 1852.
    Patrick Hayes                  Retired as Captain, 1863.
    T. Copeland
    H. McQuade                     Transferred to 6 R.I.R., 7th January,
                                     1882.
    H. Jones                       Transferred to 3 R.I.R., 10th June,
                                     1882.
    J. McGarty                     Retired 23rd August, 1883.
    L. Duffy                       Superseded 24th October, 1884.
    P. J. Thorpe                   Cashiered 3rd November, 1893.
    J. Cunningham                  Died in South Africa, 1st March,
                                     1898.
    Q. T. Drage                    To Depôt, 21st October, 1903.
    H. W. Foster

        SURGEONS.
    Samuel A. Piper, M.D.          Removed to 30th Regiment, 1830.
    James Cross                    Half-pay, 1837.
    John Maitland                  Exchanged to R.C. Regiment, 1843.
    William Gardiner               Exchanged to 8th Regiment, 1842.
    R. J. O’Flaherty               Promoted, 1845.
    George Ledingham               Died at Poona, 1850.
    Frederick Hobson Clark         Died at sea, 1855.
    Charles F. Stephenson          Died at Deesa, 1856.
    Robert Browne                  Exchanged to 25th Regiment, 1863.
    Chas. R. Robinson
    J. H. Macfadin                 Exchanged to 47th Foot, 8th Dec.,
                                     1869.

      SURGEON-MAJOR.
    A. R. Hudson                   Transferred to Staff 28th March,
                                     1879.

      ASSISTANT-SURGEONS.
    George R. Watson               Died at Ballinrobe, 1882.
    David Pitcairn                 Exchanged to 15th Hussars, 1854.
    James Flyter                   Exchanged to 4th Dragoon Guards,
                                     1847.
    James Macbeth                  Removed to Staff, 1843.
    John H. Ker Innes              To Staff, 1851.
    W. S. S. H. Monro              Retired, 1855.
    John Hamilton Bews             To Staff (promoted), 1855.
    W. N. Boyce                    Died at Kurrachee, 1862.
    Edward Touch                   Promoted to Staff, 1857.
    H. C. Miles                    Promoted.
    William Sharp                  Half-pay.
    Thomas Mould                   Transferred to Royal Artillery, 1862.
    C. S. Wills
    J. Bourke                      Exchanged to 2nd 15th Regiment, 10th
                                     February, 1869.
    E. Coffey                      Transferred to Staff 6th March, 1870.
    W. Geoghan
    T. G. Adye Curran              Transferred, 1874.




                                THE END


FOOTNOTES:

[1] On clearing the harbour, one of the transports with a company on
board was so much damaged by another vessel running foul of her as to
be unable to proceed, which company was relanded on the Isle of Wight,
and rejoined the head-quarters at Saint Domingo in 1798.

[2]

  Dr. Weir, 6th August, 1795.
  Col. Fitch, 12th September, 1795.
  Lt. Rawes, 2nd September, 1795.
  Capt. Lee, 18th September, 1795.
  Ens. Horridge, 24th October, 1795.
  Lt. Armstrong, 27th October, 1795.
  Lt. Morton, 28th October, 1795.
  Lt. Cove, 30th October, 1795.
  Capt. Hansald, 9th November, 1795.
  Capt. Hay, 14th November, 1795.
  Lt. Wilton, 14th November, 1795.
  S. Mat. Clancy, 14th November, 1795.
  Ens. Byrne, 17th August, 1796.
  Ens. Morris, 20th August, 1796.
  Capt. Stone, 20th August, 1796.
  Lt. Trumane, 20th April, 1797.
  Ens. Lawton.
  Lt. Batt, 20th August, 1800.
  F. Smith, 8th August, 1800.
  Ens. Hill, 30th September, 1800.
  Major White, 27th November, 1800.
  Lt. Gibson, 4th October, 1800.
  Capt. Wilson, 7th June, 1801.
  Lt. Williams, 1st December, 1800.
  Lt. Wright, 12th December, 1801.
  Lt. Farrell, 26th January, 1802.

[3] _Vide_ Memoir of 2nd Battalion, commencing in the year 1817.

[4] The regiment, and especially the Light Company, were warmly thanked
by General Picton for their conduct.

[5] Name not in records.

[6] During the Kandyan War, Captain Trydell, in command of the Light
Company of the 83rd, attacked a formidable body of rebels posted within
the lofty walls of a temple, five miles from Ballengadde, drove them
out, and defeated them with considerable loss.

[7] Lieutenant Cautwell, Lieutenant Smith, Ensign Macnac.

[8] Lieutenant Cox.

[9] Under the command of Lieutenant-Colonel Cother.

[10] Died: Assistant-Surgeon G. R. Watson, Lieut. H. S. G. Bowles.

[11] Major T. Summerfield, Lieutenant Hon. R. Clifford.

[12] Lieutenant R. Coghlan.

[13] Lieutenant and Adjutant J. Stubbs.

[14] The regiment, on its route from Toronto to Quebec, passed down
the Lachine Rapids, in the River St. Lawrence; the 1st division on the
23rd, and the 2nd division on the 24th May, 1843.

[15] Officers, 52; non-commissioned and rank and file, 1079; total 1131.

[16] Lieutenant W. Hall became adjutant in April, but died very soon
afterwards. He had been promoted from the ranks. He was succeeded as
adjutant by Lieutenant E. H. M. Mainwaring.

[17] The 64th Regiment were quartered with the 83rd during the time
they were in Kurrachee, and the two regiments were on the most friendly
terms from being so much together.

[18] On the 4th October, 1857, Captain R. C. Jones died at Ahmedabad.

[19] Sergeants, 8; corporals, 10; drummers, 7; privates, 463.




Transcriber's Note:

1. Obvious printer errors have been corrected.

2. Spelling of names has been retained as published.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MEMOIRS AND SERVICES OF THE
EIGHTY-THIRD REGIMENT, COUNTY OF DUBLIN, FROM 1793 TO 1907 ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
